- 115 -
- 114 -
- 145 -
- 116 -
- 30 -
- 146 -
- 112 -
- 8 -
- 113 -
- 31 -
- 27 -
- 144 -
- 120 -
- 26 -
- 9 -
- 29 -
- 117 -
- 28 -
- 119 -
- 118 -
- 32 -
- 39 -
- 105 -
- 7 -
- 38 -
- 106 -
- 103 -
- 148 -
- 104 -
- 147 -
- 40 -
- 34 -
- 109 -
- 110 -
- 111 -
- 33 -
- 37 -
- 107 -
- 108 -
- 35 -
- 36 -
- 121 -
- 134 -
- 133 -
- 16 -
- 11 -
- 15 -
- 131 -
- 19 -
- 18 -
- 17 -
- 132 -
- 140 -
- 13 -
- 138 -
- 139 -
- 12 -
- 141 -
- 135 -
- 14 -
- 137 -
- 136 -
- 130 -
- 124 -
- 24 -
- 23 -
- 22 -
- 125 -
- 122 -
- 25 -
- 68 -
- 123 -
- 143 -
( )
- 142 -
- 128 -
- 20 -
- 129 -
- 127 -
- 126 -
- 21 -
- 10 -
( )
- 149 -
- 57 -
- 79 -
- 80 -
- 153 -
- 56 -
- 77 -
- 60 -
- 59 -
- 58 -
- 78 -
- 4 -
- 84 -
- 85 -
- 152 -
- 86 -
- 82 -
- 81 -
- 55 -
- 54 -
- 83 -
- 64 -
- 70 -
- 71 -
- 72 -
- 63 -


- 156 -
1609 
- 65 -
- 75 -
- 154 -
- 61 -
- 3 -
- 76 -
- 73 -
- 155 -
- 62 -
- 67 -
- 74 -
- 53 -
- 97 -
- 150 -
- 98 -
- 45 -
- 46 -
- 95 -
- 48 -
- 47 -
- 96 -
- 42 -
- 101 -
- 41 -
- 102 -
- 43 -
- 6 -
- 44 -
- 100 -
- 99 -
- 89 -
- 88 -
- 90 -
- 91 -
- 50 -
- 151 -
- 69 -
- 87 -
- 51 -
- 52 -
- 92 -
- 5 -
- 49 -
- 94 -
- 93 -
- 66 -
WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE
And hang more praise vpon deceased I,
How with this rage shall beautie hold a plea,
65: Since brasse, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundlesse sea
Shakespeare: Sonnets 65: Since brasse, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundlesse sea
Since brasse, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundlesse sea,
Because he needs no praise, wilt thou be dumb?
Now this ill wresting world is growne so bad,
In daies long since, before these last so bad.
Which I by lacking haue supposed dead,
Before the goulden tresses of the dead,
Aboue a mortall pitch, that struck me dead?
When all the breathers of this world are dead,
That all the world besides me thinkes y’are dead.
The pray of wormes, my body being dead,
Noe longer mourne for me when I am dead,
71: Noe longer mourne for me when I am dead
Shakespeare: Sonnets 71: Noe longer mourne for me when I am dead
Ere you were borne was beauties summer dead.
Where time and outward forme would shew it dead,
To liue a second life on second head,
If haires be wiers, black wiers grow on her head:
148: O me what eyes hath loue put in my head
Shakespeare: Sonnets 148: O me what eyes hath loue put in my head
O me what eyes hath loue put in my head,
But then begins a iourny in my head
Mine owne selfe loue quite contrary I read
Which eyes not yet created shall ore-read,
Great Princes fauorites their faire leaues spread,
O him she stores, to show what welth she had,
Past reason hunted, and no sooner had
This told, I ioy, but then no longer glad,
On purpose layd to make the taker mad.
I send them back againe and straight grow sad.
And right perfection wrongfully disgrac’d,
That I in thy abundance am suffic’d,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 27: Weary with toyle, I hast me to my bed
Weary with toyle, I hast me to my bed,
27: Weary with toyle, I hast me to my bed
When I haue seene by times fell hand defaced
64: When I haue seene by times fell hand defaced
Shakespeare: Sonnets 64: When I haue seene by times fell hand defaced
Shewing their birth, and where they did proceed?
I found (or thought I found) you did exceed,
But when my glasse shewes me my selfe indeed
Till I returne of posting is noe need.
I neuer saw that you did painting need,
83: I neuer saw that you did painting need
Shakespeare: Sonnets 83: I neuer saw that you did painting need
Of my dull bearer, when from thee I speed,
And keepe inuention in a noted weed,
To tye vp enuy, euermore inlarged,
Giuing him ayde, my verse astonished.
Which but too daie by feeding is alaied,
In my loues veines thou hast too grosely died,
And in them-selues their pride lies buried,
And all those friends which I thought buried.
And strength by limping sway disabled,
Giue warning to the world that I am fled
Or if they haue, where is my iudgment fled,
Beautious thou art, therefore to be assailed.
Will sourely leaue her till he haue preuailed.
To side this title is impannelled
And the iust pleasure lost, which is so deemed,
121: Tis better to be vile then vile esteemed
Shakespeare: Sonnets 121: Tis better to be vile then vile esteemed
Tis better to be vile then vile esteemed,
And by their verdict is determined
Finding the first conceit of loue there bred,
You are so strongly in my purpose bred,
To base of thee to be remembred,
O that our night of wo might haue remembred
For feare of which, heare this thou age vnbred,
And soone to you, as you to me then tendred
It might for fortunes basterd be vnfathered,
But at my mistres eie loues brand new fired,
To worke my mind, when boddies work’s expired.
I sick withall the helpe of bath desired,
The deare repose for lims with trauaill tired,
In things right true my heart and eyes haue erred,
And to this false plague are they now transferred.
Currall is farre more red, then her lips red,
Which rancke of goodnesse would by ill be cured.
Vntill liues composition be recured,
Who euen but now come back againe assured,
The ills that were, not grew to faults assured,
When sometime loftie towers I see downe rased,
A torment thrice three-fold thus to be crossed:
And my next selfe thou harder hast ingrossed,
And by addition me of thee defeated,
And for a woman wert thou first created,
For all the day they view things vnrespected,
And darkely bright, are bright in darke directed.
And maiden vertue rudely strumpeted,
Nor are mine eares with thy toungs tune delighted,
Nor taste, nor smell, desire to be inuited
20: A womans face with natures owne hand painted
A womans face with natures owne hand painted,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 20: A womans face with natures owne hand painted
Of faults conceald, wherein I am attainted:
A womans gentle hart but not acquainted
With mine owne weakenesse being best acquainted,
How haue mine eies out of their Spheares bene fitted
What wretched errors hath my heart committed,
Hath motion, and mine eye may be deceaued.
Then happy I that loue and am beloued
I neuer writ, nor no man euer loued.
Where I may not remoue, nor be remoued.
If this be error and vpon me proued,
Iust to the time, not with the time exchang’d,
That is my home of loue, if I haue rang’d,
Either not assayld, or victor beeing charg’d,
56: Sweet loue renew thy force, be it not said
Sweet loue renew thy force, be it not said
Shakespeare: Sonnets 56: Sweet loue renew thy force, be it not said
Or who his spoile or beautie can forbid?
For thy neglect of truth in beauty di’d?
So dost thou too, and therein dignifi’d:
Shall times best Iewell from times chest lie hid?
Mine eye hath play’d the painter and hath steeld,
24: Mine eye hath play’d the painter and hath steeld
Shakespeare: Sonnets 24: Mine eye hath play’d the painter and hath steeld
Wil be a totter’d weed of smal worth held:
My body is the frame wherein ti’s held,
And digge deep trenches in thy beauties field,
And precious phrase by all the Muses fil’d.
The second burthen of a former child?
With beauties treasure ere it be selfe kil’d:
After a thousand victories once foild,
And all the rest forgot for which he toild:
While comments of your praise richly compil’d,
In thee thy summer ere thou be distil’d:
Hath beene before, how are our braines beguild,
Therefore to giue them from me was I bold,
To say they erre, I dare not be so bold,
And barren rage of deaths eternall cold?
For as the Sun is daily new and old,
To me faire friend you neuer can be old,
104: To me faire friend you neuer can be old
Shakespeare: Sonnets 104: To me faire friend you neuer can be old
Yet in good faith some say that thee behold,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 73: That time of yeare thou maist in me behold
That time of yeare thou maist in me behold,
73: That time of yeare thou maist in me behold
For nothing hold me, so it please thee hold,
That poore retention could not so much hold,
Which husbandry in honour might vphold,
And wherefore say not I that I am old?
Then in the number let me passe vntold,
And age in loue, loues not t’haue yeares told.
So is my loue still telling what is told,
Vpon those boughes which shake against the could,
And see thy blood warme when thou feel’st it could.
But when in thee times forrowes I behould,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 22: My glasse shall not perswade me I am ould
22: My glasse shall not perswade me I am ould
My glasse shall not perswade me I am ould,
What thou dost foyst vpon vs that is ould,
Then thinke that we before haue heard them tould:
This were to be new made when thou art ould,
To truths translated, and for true things deem’d.
The basest Iewell wil be well esteem’d:
By chance, or natures changing course vntrim’d:
And often is his gold complexion dimm’d,
Was sleeping by a Virgin hand disarm’d.
Which many Legions of true hearts had warm’d,
Ah yet doth beauty like a Dyall hand,
Praising thy worth, dispight his cruell hand.
Came tripping by, but in her maiden hand,
To what it workes in, like the Dyers hand,
To kisse the tender inward of thy hand,
The Lillie I condemned for thy hand,
For nimble thought can iumpe both sea and land,
Thence comes it that my name receiues a brand,
Laid by his side his heart inflaming brand,
No matter then although my foote did stand
The Roses fearefully on thornes did stand,
At the woods bouldnes by thee blushing stand.
So your sweete hew, which me thinkes still doth stand
And yet to times in hope, my verse shall stand
When in the least of them my life hath end,
Doth follow night who like a fiend
And whether that my angel be turn’d fiend,
But if the while I thinke on thee (deare friend)
In true plaine words, by thy true telling friend.
But being both from me both to each friend,
On newer proofe, to trie an older friend,
Thus farre the miles are measurde from thy friend.
Who hateth thee that I doe call my friend,
Natures bequest giues nothing but doth lend,
What strained touches Rhethorick can lend,
And you but one, can euery shaddow lend:
Vttring bare truth, euen so as foes Commend.
Want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend:
Were it not sinfull then striuing to mend,
But beauties waste hath in the world an end,
I hate she alterd with an end,
Now all is done, haue what shall haue no end,
Then that, which on thy humor doth depend.
Looke what an vnthrift in the world doth spend
Dost thou vpon thy fading mansion spend?
I haue no precious time at al to spend;
Nay if thou lowrst on me doe I not spend
Shakespeare: Sonnets 4: Vnthrifty louelinesse why dost thou spend
Vnthrifty louelinesse why dost thou spend,
4: Vnthrifty louelinesse why dost thou spend
So do our minuites hasten to their end,
Eate vp thy charge? is this thy bodies end?
All losses are restord, and sorrowes end.
When what I seeke (my wearie trauels end)
All toungs (the voice of soules) giue thee that end,
In sequent toile all forwards do contend.
For to no other passe my verses tend,
57: Being your slaue what should I doe but tend
Being your slaue what should I doe but tend,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 57: Being your slaue what should I doe but tend
That millions of strange shaddowes on you tend?
Neuer beleeue though in my nature raign’d,
That it could so preposterouslie be stain’d,
O what excuse will my poore beast then find,
A God in loue, to whom I am confin’d.
Whilst I thy babe chace thee a farre behind,
That thou no forme of thee hast left behind,
My greefe lies onward and my ioy behind.
Be as thy presence is gracious and kind,
And play the mothers part kisse me, be kind.
Then churls their thoughts (although their eies were kind)
Those that can see thou lou’st, and I am blind.
Doth part his function, and is partly blind,
They looke into the beauty of thy mind,
For that same grone doth put this in my mind,
Loe thus by day my lims, by night my mind,
Then should I spurre though mounted on the wind,
Three Aprill perfumes in three hot Iunes burn’d,
Three beautious springs to yellow Autumne turn’d,
A maide of Dyans this aduantage found,
In other accents doe this praise confound
And time that gaue, doth now his gift confound.
As twixt a miser and his wealth is found.
My Mistres when shee walkes treads on the ground,
Or as sweet season’d shewers are to the ground:
In a could vallie-fountaine of that ground:
That Musicke hath a farre more pleasing sound:
Crawles to maturity, wherewith being crown’d,
Their outward thus with outward praise is crownd,
To leaue for nothing all thy summe of good:
Which in their wils count bad what I think good?
Giue saluation to my sportiue blood?
All frailties that besiege all kindes of blood,
And burne the long liu’d Phaenix in her blood,
And make the earth deuoure her owne sweet brood,
Borne on the beare with white and bristly beard:
Which erst from heat did canopie the herd
Weeds among weeds, or flowers with flowers gatherd.
And found it in thy cheeke: he can affoord
He lends thee vertue, and he stole that word,
So then I am not lame, poore, nor dispis’d,
Where cheekes need blood, in thee it is abus’d.
And their grosse painting might be better vs’d,
And loathsome canker liues in sweetest bud.
And almost thence my nature is subdu’d
Steale from his figure, and no pace perceiu’d,
Roses haue thornes, and siluer fountaines mud,
And Arts with thy sweete graces graced be.
And in our faults by lyes we flattered be.
Madde slanderers by madde eares beleeued be.
As soone as thinke the place where he would be.
Which shall be most my glory being dombe,
When others would giue life, and bring a tombe.
Though yet heauen knowes it is but as a tombe
To make him much out-liue a gilded tombe:
Or who is he so fond will be the tombe,
For where is she so faire whose vn-eard wombe
Let this sad Intrim like the Ocean be
Pitty the world, or else this glutton be,
He is contented thy poore drudge to be
Thy proud hearts slaue and vassall wretch to be:
Which vsed liues th’executor to be.
And to be praisd of ages yet to be.
But if thou liue remembred not to be,
Yet what the best is, take the worst to be.
This I doe vow and this shall euer be,
Since all alike my songs and praises be
What ere thy thoughts, or thy hearts workings be,
But slaue to slauery my sweet’st friend must be.
Her Audite (though delayd) answer’d must be,
Though in thy stores account I one must be,
That I an accessary needs must be,
To put faire truth vpon so foule a face,
Looke in your glasse and there appeares a face,
Fairing the foule with Arts faulse borrow’d face,
Then let not winters wragged hand deface,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 6: Then let not winters wragged hand deface
6: Then let not winters wragged hand deface
With ougly rack on his celestiall face,
To dry the raine on my storme-beaten face,
To follow that which flies before her face:
Like a deceiued husband, so loues face,
As those two morning eyes become thy face:
A thousand grones but thinking on thy face,
Whilst her neglected child holds her in chace,
Make sweet some viall; treasure thou some place,
Which my heart knowes the wide worlds common place?
And my sick Muse doth giue an other place.
Thy lookes with me, thy heart in other place.
Nor giues to necessary wrinckles place,
Thy blacke is fairest in my iudgements place.
Then can no horse with my desire keepe pace,
To mourne for me since mourning doth thee grace,
My verse alone had all thy gentle grace,
That heales the wound, and cures not the disgrace:
Dulling my lines, and doing me disgrace.
But is prophan’d, if not liues in disgrace.
Stealing vnseene to west with this disgrace:
Shall naigh noe dull flesh in his fiery race,
As high as learning, my rude ignorance.
But thou art all my art, and doost aduance
And nothing gainst Times sieth can make defence
Against thy reasons making no defence.
And I will comment vpon that offence,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 51: Thus can my loue excuse the slow offence
Thus can my loue excuse the slow offence,
51: Thus can my loue excuse the slow offence
Which nightly gulls him with intelligence,
Saue breed to braue him, when he takes thee hence.
From where thou art, why should I hast me thence,
I was not sick of any feare from thence.
Others, but stewards of their excellence:
Still constant in a wondrous excellence,
And gainst my selfe a lawfull plea commence,
Who pleade for loue, and look for recompence,
Marke how with my neglect I doe dispence.
And husband natures ritches from expence,
One thing expressing, leaues out difference.
For to thy sensuall fault I bring in sence,
Of others voyces, that my Adders sence,
O let my books be then the eloquence,
That did my ripe thoughts in my braine inhearce,
Some in their wealth, some in their bodies force,
They liue vnwoo’d, and vnrespected fade,
But thy eternall Sommer shall not fade,
Since euery one, hath euery one, one shade,
Nor shall death brag thou wandr’st in his shade,
When in dead night their faire imperfect shade,
But loue, for loue, thus shall excuse my iade,
How would (I say) mine eyes be blessed made,
Therefore desire (of perfects loue being made)
Of their sweet deathes, are sweetest odors made:
53: What is your substance, whereof are you made
What is your substance, whereof are you made,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 53: What is your substance, whereof are you made
For if I should dispaire I should grow madde,
For then my thoughts (from far where I abide)
Are both with thee, where euer I abide,
Is more then my ore-prest defence can bide?
The forward violet thus did I chide,
99: The forward violet thus did I chide
Shakespeare: Sonnets 99: The forward violet thus did I chide
Shakespeare: Sonnets 111: O for my sake doe you with fortune chide
O for my sake doe you with fortune chide,
111: O for my sake doe you with fortune chide
And from the for-lorne world his visage hide
Or as the ward-robe which the robe doth hide,
That some-times anger thrusts into his hide,
If thou doost seeke to haue what thou doost hide,
These present absent with swift motion slide.
By selfe example mai’st thou be denide.
Whilst he vpon your soundlesse deepe doth ride,
Be anchord in the baye where all men ride,
Anon permit the basest cloudes to ride,
By new vnfoulding his imprison’d pride.
If not from my loues breath, the purple pride,
Wooing his purity with her fowle pride.
That hauing such a skope to show her pride,
As his triumphant prize, proud of this pride,
Haue from the forrests shooke three summers pride,
Why is my verse so barren of new pride?
Shakespeare: Sonnets 76: Why is my verse so barren of new pride?
76: Why is my verse so barren of new pride?
He of tall building, and of goodly pride.
Why with the time do I not glance aside
Deare heart forbeare to glance thine eye aside,
Then when it hath my added praise beside.
More sharpe to me then spurring to his side,
To stand in thy affaires, fall by thy side.
Whereto the iudgement of my heart is tide?
That did not better for my life prouide,
Beare thine eyes straight, though thy proud heart goe |(wide.
And keepe my drooping eye-lids open wide,
Such seemes your beautie still: Three Winters colde,
Vnder that bond that him as fast doth binde.
Oh what a happy title do I finde,
Least eyes well seeing thy foule faults should finde.
By oft predict that I in heauen finde.
Therefore my verse to constancie confin’de,
For thee, and for my selfe, noe quiet finde.
Commit to these waste blacks, and thou shalt finde
For thou art couetous, and he is kinde,
Kinde is my loue to day, to morrow kinde,
O cunning loue, with teares thou keepst me blinde,
By childrens eyes, her husbands shape in minde:
Thou canst not vex me with inconstant minde,
To take a new acquaintance of thy minde.
But loue hate on for now I know thy minde,
O change thy thought, that I may change my minde,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 113: Since I left you, mine eye is in my minde
113: Since I left you, mine eye is in my minde
Since I left you, mine eye is in my minde,
Mine appetite I neuer more will grin’de
Pointing to each his thunder, raine and winde,
Who ere keepes me, let my heart be his garde,
Prison my heart in thy steele bosomes warde,
The mortall Moone hath her eclipse indur’de,
Incertenties now crowne them-selues assur’de,
And do so loue, yet when they haue deuisde,
Pitty me then, and wish I were renu’de,
But now my gracious numbers are decayde,
79: Whilst I alone did call vpon thy ayde
Shakespeare: Sonnets 79: Whilst I alone did call vpon thy ayde
Whilst I alone did call vpon thy ayde,
For as you were when first your eye I eyde,
That I may not be so, nor thou be lyde,
Thou truly faire, wert truly simpathizde,
Thy pitty may deserue to pittied bee.
Of more delight then Hawkes or Horses bee:
Haue put on black, and louing mourners bee,
But that your trespasse now becomes a fee,
To eate the worlds due, by the graue and thee.
I will be true dispight thy syeth and thee.
If ten of thine ten times refigur’d thee,
All dayes are nights to see till I see thee,
I may not euer-more acknowledge thee,
Whome thine eyes wooe as mine importune thee,
And what is’t but mine owne when I praise thee,
But why of two othes breach doe I accuse thee,
For all my vowes are othes but to misuse thee:
Then may I dare to boast how I doe loue thee,
More worthy I to be belou’d of thee.
Whose influence is thine, and borne of thee,
And in my madnesse might speake ill of thee,
Diswade one foolish heart from seruing thee,
Thy vnus’d beauty must be tomb’d with thee,
Die single and thine Image dies with thee.
And I am still with them, and they with thee.
By those swift messengers return’d from thee,
Vpon the farthest earth remoou’d from thee,
His rider lou’d not speed being made from thee:
But sweet, or culler it had stolne from thee.
How far I toyle, still farther off from thee.
So runst thou after that which flies from thee,
Is it thy spirit that thou send’st from thee
Thou art thy mothers glasse and she in thee
Looke what is best, that best I wish in thee,
Excuse not silence so, for’t lies in thee,
And yet thou wilt, for I being pent in thee,
Their images I lou’d, I view in thee,
But when I sleepe, in dreames they looke on thee,
For Sommer and his pleasures waite on thee,
Delights to peepe, to gaze therein on thee
For bending all my louing thoughts on thee,
So long liues this, and this giues life to thee,
Intend a zelous pilgrimage to thee,
The very part was consecrate to thee,
For who’s so dumbe that cannot write to thee,
In tender Embassie of loue to thee,
Hers by thy beauty temdiv.1.titleng her to thee,
That nothing me, a some-thing sweet to thee.
To keepe an adiunckt to remember thee,
And her Quietus is to render thee.
That’s for thy selfe to breed an other thee,
For all that beauty that doth couer thee,
That beauty still may liue in thine or thee.
But mutuall render, onely me for thee.
Which for their habitation chose out thee,
But rysing at thy name doth point out thee,
Mine ransoms yours, and yours must ransome mee.
Euen that your pittie is enough to cure mee.
Were to import forgetfulnesse in mee.
But heauen in thy creation did decree,
But thou wilt not, nor he will not be free,
And being franck she lends to those are free:
He paies the whole, and yet am I not free.
And take thou my oblacion, poore but free,
More flowers I noted, yet none could see,
Looking on darknes which the blind doe see.
And all things turne to faire, that eies can see
So long as men can breath or eyes can see,
So thou through windowes of thine age shalt see,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 43: When most I winke then doe mine eyes best see
When most I winke then doe mine eyes best see,
43: When most I winke then doe mine eyes best see
Or made them swere against the thing they see.
Come daily to the banckes, that when they see:
That they behold and see not what they see:
Pittie me then deare friend, and I assure yee,
Louing offendors thus I will excuse yee,
That she hath thee is of my wayling cheefe,
I doe forgiue thy robb’rie gentle theefe
Art left the prey of euery vulgar theefe.
Th’offenders sorrow lends but weake reliefe
And yet loue knowes it is a greater griefe
Most worthy comfort, now my greatest griefe,
That thou hast her is not all my griefe,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 42: That thou hast her is not all my griefe
42: That thou hast her is not all my griefe
Nor can thy shame giue phisicke to my griefe,
That thou consum’st thy selfe in single life?
So then thou hast but lost the dregs of life,
75: So are you to my thoughts as food to life
So are you to my thoughts as food to life,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 75: So are you to my thoughts as food to life
My sweet loues beauty, though my louers life.
Giue my loue fame faster then time wasts life,
So thou preuentst his sieth, and crooked knife.
Against confounding Ages cruell knife,
The coward conquest of a wretches knife,
And for the peace of you I hold such strife,
The world will waile thee like a makelesse wife,
The rich proud cost of outworne buried age,
Resembling strong youth in his middle age,
And peace proclaimes Oliues of endlesse age,
Waighes not the dust and iniury of age,
Had my friends Muse growne with this growing age,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 26: Lord of my loue, to whome in vassalage
Lord of my loue, to whome in vassalage
26: Lord of my loue, to whome in vassalage
Attending on his goulden pilgrimage:
To march in ranckes of better equipage:
But makes antiquitie for aye his page,
Or some fierce thing repleat with too much rage,
So should my papers (yellowed with their age)
And brasse eternall slaue to mortall rage.
And your true rights be termd a Poets rage,
And the sad Augurs mock their owne presage,
To thee I send this written ambassage
Shakespeare: Sonnets 23: As an vnperfect actor on the stage
23: As an vnperfect actor on the stage
As an vnperfect actor on the stage,
Take heed (deare heart) of this large priuiledge,
The hardest knife ill vs’d doth loose his edge.
To set a forme vpon desired change,
So far from variation or quicke change?
Shakespeare: Sonnets 123: No Time, thou shalt not bost that I doe change
123: No Time, thou shalt not bost that I doe change
No Time, thou shalt not bost that I doe change,
Therefore in that I cannot know thy change,
When yellow leaues, or none, or few doe hange
I will acquaintance strangle and looke strange:
To me are nothing nouell, nothing strange,
To new found methods, and to compounds strange?
Is writ in moods and frounes and wrinckles strange.
39: Oh how thy worth with manners may I singe
Shakespeare: Sonnets 39: Oh how thy worth with manners may I singe
Oh how thy worth with manners may I singe,
As Philomell in summers front doth singe,
Till nature as she wrought thee fell a dotinge,
Least I (too much proface) should do it wronge:
Spendst thou thy furie on some worthlesse songe,
Because I would not dull you with my songe.
To know my shames and praises from your tounge,
We sicken to shun sicknesse when we purge.
With eager compounds we our pallat vrge,
Rough windes do shake the darling buds of Maie,
32: If thou suruiue my well contented daie
If thou suruiue my well contented daie,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 32: If thou suruiue my well contented daie
Make answere Muse, wilt thou not haply saie,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 16: But wherefore do not you a mightier waie
16: But wherefore do not you a mightier waie
But wherefore do not you a mightier waie
Othes of thy loue, thy truth, thy constancie,
The Canker bloomes haue full as deepe a die,
Though to it selfe, it onely liue and die,
And for this sinne there is no remedie,
Ah; if thou issulesse shalt hap to die,
Happy to haue thy loue, happy to die
That thereby beauties Rose might neuer die,
Thou shouldst print more, not let that coppy die.
For at a frowne they in their glory die.
Flatter the mountaine tops with soueraine eie,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 62: Sinne of selfe-loue possesseth al mine eie
Sinne of selfe-loue possesseth al mine eie,
62: Sinne of selfe-loue possesseth al mine eie
Thy registers and thee I both defie,
Though absence seem’d my flame to quallifie,
For such a time do I now fortifie
Cheared and checkt euen by the selfe-same skie:
To swere against the truth so foule a lie.
Shakespeare: Sonnets 115: Those lines that I before haue writ doe lie
Those lines that I before haue writ doe lie,
115: Those lines that I before haue writ doe lie
But things remou’d that hidden in there lie.
And heauie ignorance aloft to flie,
Since that my life on thy reuolt doth lie,
Sinkes downe to death, opprest with melancholie.
And that your loue taught it this Alcumie?
Alas why fearing of times tiranie,
Of mouthed graues will giue thee memorie,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 105: Let not my loue be cal’d Idolatrie
105: Let not my loue be cal’d Idolatrie
Let not my loue be cal’d Idolatrie,
The skope and tenure of thy Ielousie?
And lace it selfe with his societie?
And with his presence grace impietie,
And simple-Truth miscalde Simplicitie,
And needie Nothing trimd in iollitie,
Times theeuish progresse to eternitie.
And arte made tung-tide by authoritie,
Shall reasons finde of setled grauitie.
Beated and chopt with tand antiquitie,
Th’ imprison’d absence of your libertie,
And giuen grace a double Maiestie.
For no man well of such a salue can speake,
Tis not enough that through the cloude thou breake,
All this away, and me most wretched make.
Shakespeare: Sonnets 145: Those lips that Loues owne hand did make
Those lips that Loues owne hand did make,
145: Those lips that Loues owne hand did make
Then of thy beauty do I question make
Shakespeare: Sonnets 81: Or I shall liue your Epitaph to make
Or I shall liue your Epitaph to make,
81: Or I shall liue your Epitaph to make
And make me trauaile forth without my cloake,
To me that languisht for her sake:
Since sweets and beauties do them-selues forsake,
To plaie the watch-man euer for thy sake.
Am of my selfe, all tirant for thy sake?
And sue a friend, came debter for my sake,
When I against my selfe with thee pertake:
The statute of thy beauty thou wilt take,
From hence your memory death cannot take,
Wretched in this alone, that thou maist take,
It is my loue that keepes mine eie awake,
As thou goest onwards still will plucke thee backe,
Therefore my Mistresse eyes are Rauen blacke,
Then will I sweare beauty her selfe is blacke,
And all they foule that thy complexion lacke.
It feares not policy that Heriticke,
But not to tell of good, or euil lucke,
Not from the stars do I my iudgement plucke,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 14: Not from the stars do I my iudgement plucke
14: Not from the stars do I my iudgement plucke
Why should false painting immitate his cheeke,
Why should poore beautie indirectly seeke,
No bitternesse that I will bitter thinke,
Whilst like a willing pacient I will drinke,
Hiding thy brau’ry in their rotten smoke.
Show me your image in some antique booke,
Shall profit thee, and much inrich thy booke.
Of their faire subiect, blessing euery booke.
And by and by cleane starued for a looke,
When that mine eye is famisht for a looke,
Oh that record could with a back-ward looke,
And therefore maiest without attaint ore-looke
These offices, so oft as thou wilt looke,
Saue what is had, or must from you be tooke.
Betwixt mine eye and heart a league is tooke,
47: Betwixt mine eye and heart a league is tooke
Shakespeare: Sonnets 47: Betwixt mine eye and heart a league is tooke
It is the star to euery wandring barke,
O no, it is an euer fixed marke
But then my friends heart let my poore heart bale,
Such cherubines as your sweet selfe resemble,
As fast as obiects to his beames assemble:
And for that sorrow, which I then didde feele,
Vnlesse my Nerues were brasse or hammered steele.
Thou canst not then vse rigor in my Iaile.
Yet be most proud of that which I compile,
In others workes thou doost but mend the stile,
Can yet the lease of my true loue controule,
When most impeacht, stands least in thy controule.
Shakespeare: Sonnets 107: Not mine owne feares, nor the prophetick soule
Not mine owne feares, nor the prophetick soule,
107: Not mine owne feares, nor the prophetick soule
Hence, thou subbornd Informer, a trew soule
Before a ioy proposd behind a dreame,
Had, hauing, and in quest, to haue extreame,
To make me toung-tide speaking of your fame.
And Beautie slanderd with a bastard shame,
Least my bewailed guilt should do thee shame,
How sweet and louely dost thou make the shame,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 95: How sweet and louely dost thou make the shame
95: How sweet and louely dost thou make the shame
Shakespeare: Sonnets 129: Th’expence of Spirit in a waste of shame
129: Th’expence of Spirit in a waste of shame
Th’expence of Spirit in a waste of shame
Is periurd, murdrous, blouddy full of blame,
Euen as when first I hallowed thy faire name.
Doth spot the beautie of thy budding name?
Knowing a better spirit doth vse your name,
Or if it weare it bore not beauties name:
Vnlesse thou take that honour from thy name:
That euery word doth almost fel my name,
Those howers that with gentle worke did frame,
5: Those howers that with gentle worke did frame
Shakespeare: Sonnets 5: Those howers that with gentle worke did frame
To this composed wonder of your frame,
Or whether reuolution be the same.
Why write I still all one, euer the same,
I must each day say ore the very same,
Will play the tirants to the very same,
For that deepe wound it giues my friend and me;
Him haue I lost, thou hast both him and me,
Returne forgetfull Muse, and straight redeeme,
The Rose lookes faire, but fairer we it deeme
And nights bright daies when dreams do shew thee me,
Her eyes so suted, and they mourners seeme,
Oh how much more doth beautie beautious seeme,
54: Oh how much more doth beautie beautious seeme
Shakespeare: Sonnets 54: Oh how much more doth beautie beautious seeme
Slandring Creation with a false esteeme,
Sing to the eare that doth thy laies esteeme,
Doing thee vantage, duble vantage me.
Doe in consent shake hands to torture me,
And for my sake euen so doth she abuse me,
Til then, not show my head where thou maist proue me
Make thee an other selfe for loue of me,
And thou (all they) hast all the all of me.
My spirit is thine the better part of me,
When thou art all the better part of me?
Shakespeare: Sonnets 132: Thine eies I loue, and they as pittying me
Thine eies I loue, and they as pittying me,
132: Thine eies I loue, and they as pittying me
Therefore I lye with her, and she with me,
Thy selfe away, are present still with me,
As I by yours, y’haue past a hell of Time,
Your selfe to pardon of selfe-doing crime.
Which die for goodnes, who haue liu’d for crime.
To waigh how once I suffered in your crime.
But I forbid thee one most hainous crime,
And beautie making beautifull old rime,
Since spight of him Ile liue in this poore rime,
Of Princes shall out-liue this powrefull rime,
With meanes more blessed then my barren rime?
And thou present’st a pure vnstayned prime.
Bearing the wanton burthen of the prime,
Calls backe the louely Aprill of her prime,
When I behold the violet past prime,
Reserue them for my loue, not for their rime,
You should liue twise in it, and in my rime.
And do what ere thou wilt swift-footed time
When in the Chronicle of wasted time,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 106: When in the Chronicle of wasted time
106: When in the Chronicle of wasted time
Compare them with the bett’ring of the time,
When I doe count the clock that tels the time,
12: When I doe count the clock that tels the time
Shakespeare: Sonnets 12: When I doe count the clock that tels the time
Now with the drops of this most balmie time,
Their worth the greater beeing woo’d of time,
To this I witnes call the foles of time,
Then vnswept stone, besmeer’d with sluttish time.
Dispight of wrinkles this thy goulden time.
That you your selfe may priuiledge your time
And yet this time remou’d was sommers time,
But were some childe of yours aliue that time,
Make warre vppon this bloudie tirant time?
To that sweet theefe which sourely robs from me.
When as thy loue hath cast his vtmost summe,
Which in thy brest doth liue, as thine in me,
If thy vnworthinesse raisd loue in me,
To find out shames and idle houres in me,
Perforce am thine and all that is in me.
Plods duly on, to beare that waight in me,
Oh giue thy selfe the thankes if ought in me,
Straight in her heart did mercie come,
49: Against that time (if euer that time come)
Shakespeare: Sonnets 49: Against that time (if euer that time come)
Against that time (if euer that time come)
Within his bending sickles compasse come,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 17: Who will beleeue my verse in time to come
17: Who will beleeue my verse in time to come
Who will beleeue my verse in time to come
Of the wide world, dreaming on things to come,
Was vsde in giuing gentle dome:
Supposde as forfeit to a confin’d doome.
But beares it out euen to the edge of doome:
That weare this world out to the ending doome.
Shall you pace forth, your praise shall stil finde roome,
Yet this aboundant issue seem’d to me,
Thine by thy beautie beeing false to me.
Thy loue is better then high birth to me,
But if thou catch thy hope turne back to me:
Of their faire health, recounting it to me.
Mine eyes haue drawne thy shape, and thine for me
He learnd but suretie-like to write for me,
Nor thou with publike kindnesse honour me,
This wish I haue, then ten times happy me.
133: Beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groane
Beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groane
Shakespeare: Sonnets 133: Beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groane
How like a Winter hath my absence beene
Shakespeare: Sonnets 97: How like a Winter hath my absence beene
97: How like a Winter hath my absence beene
118: Like as to make our appetites more keene
Like as to make our appetites more keene
Shakespeare: Sonnets 118: Like as to make our appetites more keene
Since first I saw you fresh which yet are greene.
And they shall liue, and he in them still greene.
Kissing with golden face the meddowes greene;
Making no summer of an others greene,
33: Full many a glorious morning haue I seene
Full many a glorious morning haue I seene,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 33: Full many a glorious morning haue I seene
In processe of the seasons haue I seene,
His beautie shall in these blacke lines be seene,
So are those errors that in thee are seene,
In him those holy antique howers are seene,
As to preuent our malladies vnseene,
What freezings haue I felt, what darke daies seene?
As on the finger of a throned Queene,
All men are bad and in their badnesse raigne.
And each (though enimes to ethers raigne)
My toung-tide patience with too much disdaine:
Knowing thy heart torment me with disdaine,
He robs thee of, and payes it thee againe,
Thou gau’st me thine not to giue backe againe.
Like him that trauels I returne againe,
When I haue seene the hungry Ocean gaine
If I loose thee, my losse is my loues gaine,
Onely my plague thus farre I count my gaine,
The one by toyle, the other to complaine
Yet do not so, but since I am neere slaine,
Presume not on thy heart when mine is slaine,
By praising him here who doth hence remaine.
Which shall aboue that idle rancke remaine
So shall those blots that do with me remaine,
And the firme soile win of the watry maine,
That she that makes me sinne, awards me paine.
The manner of my pittie wanting paine,
Kill me out-right with lookes, and rid my paine.
Looking with pretty ruth vpon my paine.
Those children nurst, deliuerd from thy braine,
Thy guift, thy tables, are within my braine
Shakespeare: Sonnets 122: Thy guift, thy tables, are within my braine
122: Thy guift, thy tables, are within my braine
Vnlesse this general euill they maintaine,
Looke what thy memorie cannot containe,
So that my selfe bring water for my staine,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 36: Let me confesse that we two must be twaine
Let me confesse that we two must be twaine,
36: Let me confesse that we two must be twaine
And that thou teachest how to make one twaine,
Both finde each other, and I loose both twaine,
And for my selfe mine owne worth do define,
Euen so my Sunne one early morne did shine,
And in my will no faire acceptance shine:
Counting no old thing old, thou mine, I thine,
For it depends vpon that loue of thine.
Or if it do, not from those lips of thine,
But that I hope some good conceipt of thine
Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine,
Proouing his beautie by succession thine.
Shakespeare: Sonnets 134: So now I haue confest that he is thine
134: So now I haue confest that he is thine
So now I haue confest that he is thine,
But when your countinance fild vp his line,
Then lackt I matter, that infeebled mine.
For tearme of life thou art assured mine,
But out alack, he was but one houre mine,
If thou couldst answere this faire child of mine
My selfe Ile forfeit, so that other mine,
Duty so great, which wit so poore as mine
Me thinkes no face so gratious is as mine,
And seald false bonds of loue as oft as mine,
Nothing sweet boy, but yet like prayers diuine,
That mine eye loues it and doth first beginne.
If it be poison’d, tis the lesser sinne,
Vnlok’d on diest vnlesse thou get a sonne.
And when a woman woes, what womans sonne,
Gentle thou art, and therefore to be wonne,
Cloudes and eclipses staine both Moone and Sunne,
My Mistres eyes are nothing like the Sunne,
130: My Mistres eyes are nothing like the Sunne
Shakespeare: Sonnets 130: My Mistres eyes are nothing like the Sunne
Euen of fiue hundreth courses of the Sunne,
Now see what good-turnes eyes for eies haue done,
Since minde at first in carrecter was done.
Shakespeare: Sonnets 35: No more bee greeu’d at that which thou hast done
35: No more bee greeu’d at that which thou hast done
No more bee greeu’d at that which thou hast done,
And our deare loue loose name of single one,
But here’s the ioy, my friend and I are one,
Although our vndeuided loues are one:
Tyr’d with all these, from these would I be gone,
Then how when nature calls thee to be gone,
For when these quicker Elements are gone
Whose speechlesse song being many, seeming one,
To leape large lengths of miles when thou art gone,
Faire, kinde, and true, haue often liu’d alone.
To any sensuall feast with thee alone:
For hauing traffike with thy selfe alone,
Although I sweare it to my selfe alone.
I’st not ynough to torture me alone,
Sweete flattery, then she loues but me alone.
That due of many, now is thine alone.
Without thy helpe, by me be borne alone.
Saue that to dye, I leaue my loue alone.
My life being made of foure, with two alone,
That due to thee which thou deseru’st alone:
Now counting best to be with you alone,
Which happies those that pay the willing lone;
I fill it full with wils, and my will one,
The sad account of fore-bemoned mone,
Least the wise world should looke into your mone,
Reuenge vpon my selfe with present mone?
I must attend, times leasure with my mone.
Among a number one is reckon’d none.
Shakespeare: Sonnets 94: They that haue powre to hurt, and will doe none
They that haue powre to hurt, and will doe none,
94: They that haue powre to hurt, and will doe none
Sings this to thee thou single wilt proue none.
Which three till now, neuer kept seate in one.
Which heauily he answers with a grone,
Thy face hath not the power to make loue grone;
Or ten times happier be it ten for one,
Nor tender feeling to base touches prone,
Who mouing others, are themselues as stone,
Before these bastard signes of faire were borne,
As to behold desert a begger borne,
And place my merrit in the eie of skorne,
With lines and wrincles, when his youthfull morne
In act thy bed-vow broake and new faith torne,
With times iniurious hand chrusht and ore-worne,
152: In louing thee thou know’st I am forsworne
In louing thee thou know’st I am forsworne,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 152: In louing thee thou know’st I am forsworne
And proue thee virtuous, though thou art forsworne:
And purest faith vnhappily forsworne,
Thus is his cheeke the map of daies out-worne,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 68: Thus is his cheeke the map of daies out-worne
68: Thus is his cheeke the map of daies out-worne
Nor Mars his sword, nor warres quick fire shall burne
When wastefull warre shall Statues ouer-turne,
Booke both my wilfulnesse and errors downe,
But those same toungs that giue thee so thine owne,
By seeing farther then the eye hath showne.
Bring me within the leuel of your frowne,
At my abuses, reckon vp their owne,
The iniuries that to my selfe I doe,
I graunt I neuer saw a goddesse goe,
Towards thee ile run, and giue him leaue to goe.
That thou among the wastes of time must goe,
Receiuing naughts by elements so sloe,
And weepe a fresh loues long since canceld woe,
Come in the rereward of a conquerd woe,
And other straines of woe, which now seeme woe,
Yet so they mourne becomming of their woe,
But heauie teares, badges of eithers woe.
If thinking on me then should make you woe.
The beast that beares me, tired with my woe,
Do I enuie those Iackes that nimble leape,
Whilst my poore lips which should that haruest reape,
When euery priuat widdow well may keepe,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 154: The little Loue-God lying once a sleepe
The little Loue-God lying once a sleepe,
154: The little Loue-God lying once a sleepe
Shakespeare: Sonnets 153: Cupid laid by his brand and fell a sleepe
Cupid laid by his brand and fell a sleepe,
153: Cupid laid by his brand and fell a sleepe
And his loue-kindling fire did quickly steepe
The world wilbe thy widdow and still weepe,
Wishing me like to one more rich in hope,
Being had to tryumph, being lackt to hope.
Blessed are you whose worthinesse giues skope,
Desiring this mans art, and that mans skope,
As cal it Winter, which being ful of care,
In so profound Abisme I throw all care
Past cure I am, now Reason is past care,
Thou best of deerest, and mine onely care,
Like stones of worth they thinly placed are,
To cryttick and to flatterer stopped are:
The eyes (fore dutious) now conuerted are
When your sweet issue your sweet forme should beare.
One on anothers necke do witnesse beare
The humble as the proudest saile doth beare,
The vacant leaues thy mindes imprint will beare,
Aye me, but yet thou mightst my feate forbeare,
In singlenesse the parts that thou should’st beare:
For truth prooues theeuish for a prize so deare.
Gor’d mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most deare,
By vnions married do offend thine eare,
And euen thence thou wilt be stolne I feare,
The other as your bountie doth appeare,
I loue not lesse, thogh lesse the show appeare,
As interest of the dead, which now appeare,
On your broad maine doth wilfully appeare.
And this my hand, against my selfe vpreare,
How many a holy and obsequious teare
And to be sure that is not false I sweare
If I might teach thee witte better it weare,
Speake of the spring, and foyzon of the yeare,
From thee, the pleasure of the fleeting yeare?
Aduantage on the Kingdome of the shoare,
Against this cumming end you should prepare,
Making a coopelment of proud compare
As any she beli’d with false compare.
Authorizing thy trespas with compare,
Makes So[m]mers welcome, thrice more wish’d, more rare:
Therefore are feasts so sollemne and so rare,
And yet by heauen I thinke my loue as rare,
With Aprills first borne flowers and all things rare,
But thou, to whom my iewels trifles are,
My thoughts and my discourse as mad mens are,
Excusing their sins more then their sins are:
Shakespeare: Sonnets 13: O that you were your selfe, but loue you are
13: O that you were your selfe, but loue you are
O that you were your selfe, but loue you are
Or if they sing, tis with so dull a cheere,
Not making worse what nature made so cleere,
As testie sick-men when their deaths be neere,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 136: If thy soule check thee that I come so neere
If thy soule check thee that I come so neere,
136: If thy soule check thee that I come so neere
From me farre of, with others all to neere.
That leaues looke pale, dreading the Winters neere.
Against that time do I insconce me here
And will thy soule knowes is admitted there,
110: Alas ’tis true, I haue gone here and there
Shakespeare: Sonnets 110: Alas ’tis true, I haue gone here and there
Alas ’tis true, I haue gone here and there,
To hidious winter and confounds him there,
If time haue any wrincle grauen there,
Who lead thee in their ryot euen there
For thee watch I, whilst thou dost wake elsewhere,
Making his stile admired euery where.
And make times spoiles dispised euery where.
What old Decembers barenesse euery where?
The owners tongue doth publish euery where.
Beauty ore-snow’d and barenes euery where,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 77: Thy glasse will shew thee how thy beauties were
77: Thy glasse will shew thee how thy beauties were
Thy glasse will shew thee how thy beauties were,
Find no determination, then you were
Shakespeare: Sonnets 127: In the ould age blacke was not counted faire
In the ould age blacke was not counted faire,
127: In the ould age blacke was not counted faire
Neither in inward worth nor outward faire
For slanders marke was euer yet the faire,
Be not selfe-wild for thou art much too faire,
And then beleeue me, my loue is as faire,
The better angell is a man right faire:
And buds of marierom had stolne thy haire,
So should the lines of life that life repaire
144: Two loues I haue of comfort and dispaire
Shakespeare: Sonnets 144: Two loues I haue of comfort and dispaire
Two loues I haue of comfort and dispaire,
Our blushing shame, an other white dispaire:
To be deaths conquest and make wormes thine heire.
But now is blacke beauties successiue heire,
The other two, slight ayre, and purging fire,
45: The other two, slight ayre, and purging fire
Shakespeare: Sonnets 45: The other two, slight ayre, and purging fire
In me thou seest the glowing of such fire,
The fayrest votary tooke vp that fire,
Our dates are breefe, and therefor we admire,
That gainst thy selfe thou stickst not to conspire,
As the death bed, whereon it must expire,
Which to repaire should be thy chiefe desire:
And rather make them borne to our desire,
Vpon the houres, and times of your desire?
And so the Generall of hot desire,
The first my thought, the other my desire,
Nor seruices to doe til you require.
Which I new pay as if not payd before.
(Though words come hind-most) holds his ranke before,
Each changing place with that which goes before,
What hast thou then more then thou hadst before?
60: Like as the waues make towards the pibled shore
Shakespeare: Sonnets 60: Like as the waues make towards the pibled shore
Like as the waues make towards the pibled shore,
Nor need I tallies thy deare loue to skore,
And heauily from woe to woe tell ore
To trust those tables that receaue thee more,
Who taught thee how to make me loue thee more,
Looke whom she best indow’d, she gaue the more;
And to the most of praise adde some-thing more,
One will of mine to make thy large Will more.
Within be fed, without be rich no more,
Or any of these all, or all, or more
All mine was thine, before thou hadst this more:
Who is it that sayes most, which can say more,
84: Who is it that sayes most, which can say more
Shakespeare: Sonnets 84: Who is it that sayes most, which can say more
In whose confine immured is the store,
And him as for a map doth Nature store,
Increasing store with losse, and losse with store.
Let those whom nature hath not made for store,
And in aboundance addeth to his store,
I make my loue ingrafted to this store:
And let that pine to aggrauat thy store;
To shew faulse Art what beauty was of yore.
Mine eye, my heart their pictures sight would barre,
Mine eye and heart are at a mortall warre,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 46: Mine eye and heart are at a mortall warre
46: Mine eye and heart are at a mortall warre
Against strange malladies a soueraigne cure:
A datelesse liuely heat still to indure,
Sweet beauty hath no name no holy boure,
Nor dare I chide the world without end houre,
For blunting the fine point of seldome pleasure.
I should in thought controule your times of pleasure,
Yet feare her O thou minnion of her pleasure,
But since she prickt thee out for womens pleasure,
And euery humor hath his adiunct pleasure,
Then betterd that the world may see my pleasure,
But these perticulers are not my measure,
Can bring him to his sweet vp-locked treasure,
Mine be thy loue and thy loues vse their treasure.
Doubting the filching age will steale his treasure,
She may detaine, but not still keepe her tresure
Being your vassail bound to staie your leisure.
The Croe, or Doue, it shapes them to your feature.
The most sweet-fauor or deformedst creature,
Nor thinke the bitternesse of absence sowre,
A Crow that flies in heauens sweetest ayre.
So that eternall loue in loues fresh case,
If all were minded so, the times should cease,
But as the riper should by time decease,
Like widdowed wombes after their Lords decease:
Your selfe again after your selfes decease,
Why so large cost hauing so short a lease,
So should that beauty which you hold in lease
Th’vncertaine sicklie appetite to please:
Vaunt in their youthfull sap, at height decrease,
Herein liues wisdome, beauty, and increase,
1: From fairest creatures we desire increase
Shakespeare: Sonnets 1: From fairest creatures we desire increase
From fairest creatures we desire increase,
The teeming Autumne big with ritch increase,
When I perceiue that men as plants increase,
For that which longer nurseth the disease.
T’is thee (my selfe) that for my selfe I praise,
The paine be mine, but thine shal be the praise.
Were an all-eating shame, and thriftlesse praise.
Cannot dispraise, but in a kinde of praise,
To subiects worse haue giuen admiring praise.
Haue eyes to wonder, but lack toungs to praise.
Yet this thy praise cannot be soe thy praise,
Finding thy worth a limmit past my praise,
That is so proude thy seruice to dispise,
But ’tis my heart what loues what they dispise,
So til the iudgement that your selfe arise,
Then both your Poets can in praise deuise.
Nor praise the deepe vermillion in the Rose,
Which like a canker in the fragrant Rose,
Saue where you are, how happy you make those.
Drawne after you, you patterne of all those.
Be it lawfull I loue thee as thou lou’st those,
Oh in what sweets doest thou thy sinnes inclose
This thought is as a death which cannot choose
But weepe to haue, that which it feares to loose.
Where you may be, or your affaires suppose,
And toungs to be, your beeing shall rehearse,
For euery vulgar paper to rehearse:
Do not so much as my poore name reherse;
And euery faire with his faire doth reherse,
And vnder thee their poesie disperse.
Your monument shall be my gentle verse,
Stird by a painted beauty to his verse,
O if (I say) you looke vpon this verse,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 86: Was it the proud full saile of his great verse
86: Was it the proud full saile of his great verse
Was it the proud full saile of his great verse,
And found such faire assistance in my verse,
While thou dost breath that poor’st into my verse,
Some in their Hawkes and Hounds, some in their Horse.
Being fond on praise, which makes your praises worse.
You to your beautious blessings adde a curse,
A liquid prisoner pent in walls of glasse,
Against that time when thou shalt strangely passe,
Shall wormes inheritors of this excesse,
Both grace and faults are lou’d of more and lesse:
For I haue sworne deepe othes of thy deepe kindnesse:
And to inlighten thee gaue eyes to blindnesse,
The spirit of Loue, with a perpetual dulnesse:
Thy hungrie eies, euen till they winck with fulnesse,
Some say thy fault is youth, some wantonesse,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 96: Some say thy fault is youth, some wantonesse
96: Some say thy fault is youth, some wantonesse
And sicke of wel-fare found a kind of meetnesse,
Euen so being full of your nere cloying sweetnesse,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 140: Be wise as thou art cruell, do not presse
Be wise as thou art cruell, do not presse
140: Be wise as thou art cruell, do not presse
Least sorrow lend me words and words expresse,
Giue them their fingers, me thy lips to kisse.
Which laboring for inuention beare amisse
My selfe corrudiv.1.titleng saluing thy amisse,
Then gentle cheater vrge not my amisse,
Though thou repent, yet I haue still the losse,
And doe not drop in for an after losse:
To him that beares the strong offenses losse.
Then soule liue thou vpon thy seruants losse,
And loosing her, my friend hath found that losse,
Now while the world is bent my deeds to crosse,
And both for my sake lay on me this crosse,
Buy tearmes diuine in selling houres of drosse:
Shakespeare: Sonnets 21: So is it not with me as with that Muse
So is it not with me as with that Muse,
21: So is it not with me as with that Muse
82: I grant thou wert not married to my Muse
I grant thou wert not married to my Muse,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 82: I grant thou wert not married to my Muse
78: So oft haue I inuok’d thee for my Muse
So oft haue I inuok’d thee for my Muse,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 78: So oft haue I inuok’d thee for my Muse
Since why to loue, I can alledge no cause.
So him I loose through my vnkinde abuse.
Then beautious nigard why doost thou abuse,
Shall sum my count, and make my old excuse
Who heauen it selfe for ornament doth vse,
Thou vsurer that put’st forth all to vse,
How much more praise deseru’d thy beauties vse,
The dedicated words which writers vse
Profitles vserer why doost thou vse
As euery Alien pen hath got my vse,
For thee, against my selfe ile vow debate,
Or else of thee this I prognosticate,
Thy aduerse party is thy Aduocate,
Then those old nine which rimers inuocate,
And Sommers lease hath all too short a date:
Thy end is Truthes and Beauties doome and date.
So long as youth and thou are of one date,
Eternal numbers to out-liue long date.
And looke vpon my selfe and curse my fate.
Ore whome their fingers walke with gentle gate,
From sullen earth sings himns at Heauens gate,
breath’d forth the sound that said I hate,
But shoote not at me in your wakened hate:
Such ciuill war is in my loue and hate,
Loue is my sinne, and thy deare vertue hate,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 142: Loue is my sinne, and thy deare vertue hate
142: Loue is my sinne, and thy deare vertue hate
The more I heare and see iust cause of hate,
As subiect to times loue, or to times hate,
For thou art so possest with murdrous hate,
For I must nere loue him whom thou dost hate.
Then look I death my daies should expiate.
And on iust proofe surmise, accumilate,
If like a Lambe he could his lookes translate.
And like enough thou knowst thy estimate,
My bonds in thee are all determinate.
Ruine hath taught me thus to ruminate
Seeking that beautious roofe to ruinate
Your shallowest helpe will hold me vp a floate,
Thus pollicie in loue t’anticipate
Thou art more louely and more temperate:
O but with mine, compare thou thine owne state,
124: Yf my deare loue were but the childe of state
Shakespeare: Sonnets 124: Yf my deare loue were but the childe of state
Yf my deare loue were but the childe of state,
When I haue seene such interchange of state,
And brought to medicine a healthfull state
But when she saw my wofull state,
To be so tikled they would change their state,
I all alone beweepe my out-cast state,
If thou wouldst vse the strength of all thy state?
Haplye I thinke on thee, and then my state,
With others thou shouldst not abhor my state.
But if that flowre with base infection meete,
But flowers distil’d though they with winter meete,
And tought it thus a new to greete:
Shakespeare: Sonnets 72: O least the world should taske you to recite
72: O least the world should taske you to recite
O least the world should taske you to recite,
I haue seene Roses damaskt, red and white,
And sable curls or siluer’d ore with white:
Nor did I wonder at the Lillies white,
Oh blame me not if I no more can write
80: O how I faint when I of you do write
O how I faint when I of you do write,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 80: O how I faint when I of you do write
Was it his spirit, by spirits taught to write,
O let me true in loue but truly write,
Thy edge should blunter be then apetite,
Is from the booke of honour rased quite,
After my death (deare loue) forget me quite,
That ouer-goes my blunt inuention quite,
But hope of Orphans, and vn-fathered fruite,
Or (being wrackt) I am a worthlesse bote,
Who in dispight of view is pleasd to dote.
If that be faire whereon my false eyes dote,
If it be not, then loue doth well denote,
For they in thee a thousand errors note,
But in the onset come, so shall I taste
And of this booke, this learning maist thou taste.
And with old woes new waile my deare times waste:
Thy dyall how thy pretious mynuits waste,
And thou away, the very birds are mute.
For I impaire not beautie being mute,
When rocks impregnable are not so stoute,
This silence for my sinne you did impute,
Thou of thy selfe thy sweet selfe dost deceaue,
Were it not thy soure leisure gaue sweet leaue,
What acceptable Audit can’st thou leaue?
Your name from hence immortall life shall haue,
That God forbid, that made me first your slaue,
58: That God forbid, that made me first your slaue
Shakespeare: Sonnets 58: That God forbid, that made me first your slaue
Or at your hand th’ account of houres to craue,
The earth can yeeld me but a common graue,
The earth can haue but earth, which is his due,
When you haue bid your seruant once adieue.
Simply I credit her false speaking tongue,
Be scorn’d, like old men of lesse truth then tongue,
Therefore like her, I some-time hold my tongue:
Be absent from thy walkes and in my tongue,
Which time and thoughts so sweetly dost deceiue.
Who all their parts of me to thee did giue,
Whilst that this shadow doth such substance giue,
From thy behauiour, beautie doth he giue
By that sweet ornament which truth doth giue,
The bountious largesse giuen thee to giue?
And your sweet semblance to some other giue.
That by this seperation I may giue:
That sinne by him aduantage should atchiue,
None else to me, nor I to none aliue,
Euen for this, let vs deuided liue,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 67: Ah wherefore with infection should he liue
67: Ah wherefore with infection should he liue
Ah wherefore with infection should he liue,
No longer yours, then you your selfe here liue,
No praise to thee, but what in thee doth liue.
Thou art the graue where buried loue doth liue,
For that sweet odor, which doth in it liue:
So great a summe of summes yet can’st not liue?
And by a part of all thy glory liue:
But from thine eies my knowledge I deriue,
As truth and beautie shal together thriue
You are my All the world, and I must striue,
Asconce and strangely: But by all aboue,
What merit liu’d in me that you should loue
Shall hate be fairer log’d then gentle loue?
Yet who knowes not conscience is borne of loue,
Which borrowd from this holie fire of loue,
To entertaine the time with thoughts of loue,
And worse essaies prou’d thee my best of loue,
For Canker vice the sweetest buds doth loue,
The constancy and virtue of your loue
Theirs for their stile ile read, his for his loue.
Loues fire heates water, water cooles not loue.
Admit impediments, loue is not loue
Will, will fulfill the treasure of thy loue,
My reason the Phisition to my loue,
So either by thy picture or my loue,
Or bends with the remouer to remoue.
For thou nor farther then my thoughts canst moue,
In things of great receit with ease we prooue.
Since my appeale saies I did striue to prooue
Hath left me, and I desperate now approoue.
Came there for cure and this by that I proue,
Or to thy selfe at least kind harted proue,
Least guilty of my faults thy sweet selfe proue.
And grew a seething bath which yet men proue,
So thou be good, slander doth but approue,
But since he died and Poets better proue,
Oh absence what a torment wouldst thou proue,
For you in me can nothing worthy proue.
Without all ornament, it selfe and true,
How can it? O how can loues eye be true,
O benefit of ill, now I finde true
Or whether shall I say mine eie saith true,
But thence I learne and find the lesson true,
That you for loue speake well of me vntrue,
My most true minde thus maketh mine vntrue.
Roses of shaddow, since his Rose is true?
Hearing you praisd, I say ’tis so, ’tis true,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 93: So shall I liue, supposing thou art true
So shall I liue, supposing thou art true,
93: So shall I liue, supposing thou art true
That doe not do the thing, they most do showe,
Then thou alone kingdomes of hearts shouldst owe.
Though I (once gone) to all the world must dye,
For I haue sworne thee faire: more periurde eye,
And scarcely greete me with that sunne thine eye,
For their can liue no hatred in thine eye,
Hath deare religious loue stolne from mine eye,
Lifts vp his burning head, each vnder eye
Where Cupid got new fire; my mistres eye.
Is it for feare to wet a widdowes eye,
9: Is it for feare to wet a widdowes eye
Shakespeare: Sonnets 9: Is it for feare to wet a widdowes eye
But as the Marygold at the suns eye,
For thy records, and what we see doth lye,
That on the ashes of his youth doth lye,
As from my soule which in thy brest doth lye:
When you intombed in mens eyes shall lye,
Vnlesse you would deuise some vertuous lye,
My heart doth plead that thou in him doost lye,
So farre from home into my deeds to prye,
sdfasd fasdfsdfsdf
Bare ruin’d quiers, where late the sweet birds sang.
And all those beauties whereof now he’s King
To bitter sawces did I frame my feeding;
To be diseas’d ere that there was true needing.
And tender chorle makst wast in niggarding:
When not to be, receiues reproach of being,
Mine eie well knowes what with his gust is greeing,
Not by our feeling, but by others seeing.
Oh tis the first, tis flatry in my seeing,
By adding one thing to my purpose nothing.
Hath put a spirit of youth in euery thing:
Comes home againe, on better iudgement making.
Or mee to whom thou gau’st it, else mistaking,
An eye more bright then theirs, lesse false in rowling:
A man in hew all Hews in his controwling,
My loue is strengthned though more weake in see-|(ming
Shakespeare: Sonnets 102: That loue is marchandiz’d, whose ritch esteeming
102: That loue is marchandiz’d, whose ritch esteeming
That loue is marchandiz’d, whose ritch esteeming,
Which proues more short then wast or ruining?
In vowing new hate after new loue bearing:
But thou art twice forsworne to me loue swearing,
What can mine owne praise to mine owne selfe bring;
Strikes each in each by mutuall ordering;
With my extern the outward honoring,
Stealing away the treasure of his Spring.
98: From you haue I beene absent in the spring
Shakespeare: Sonnets 98: From you haue I beene absent in the spring
From you haue I beene absent in the spring,
Our loue was new, and then but in the spring,
And only herauld to the gaudy spring,
Of this our time, all you prefiguring,
The Charter of thy worth giues thee releasing:
Yet in these thoughts my selfe almost despising,
(Like to the Larke at breake of daye arising)
Who all in one, one pleasing note do sing:
Thine eyes, that taught the dumbe on high to sing,
They had not still enough your worth to sing:
Shakespeare: Sonnets 87: Farewell thou art too deare for my possessing
87: Farewell thou art too deare for my possessing
Farewell thou art too deare for my possessing,
For how do I hold thee but by thy granting,
The cause of this faire guift in me is wanting,
And puts apparrell on my tottered louing,
Hate of my sinne, grounded on sinfull louing,
Til whatsoeuer star that guides my mouing,
And thou shalt finde merrits not reproouing,
And for that ritches where is my deseruing?
And so my pattent back againe is sweruing.
Thy selfe thou gau’st, thy owne worth then not knowing,
So thy great guift vpon misprision growing,
Haue added fethers to the learneds wing,
To what you will, to you it doth belong,
Such is my loue, to thee I so belong,
To loue that well, which thou must leaue ere long.
Where art thou Muse that thou forgetst so long,
100: Where art thou Muse that thou forgetst so long
Shakespeare: Sonnets 100: Where art thou Muse that thou forgetst so long
This thou perceu’st, which makes thy loue more strong,
Be where you list, your charter is so strong,
139: O call not me to iustifie the wrong
O call not me to iustifie the wrong,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 139: O call not me to iustifie the wrong
That for thy right, my selfe will beare all wrong.
That my steel’d sence or changes right or wrong,
Yet doe thy worst ould Time dispight thy wrong,
And stretched miter of an Antique song.
Wound me not with thine eye but with thy toung,
Thus vainely thinking that she thinkes me young,
My loue shall in my verse euer liue young.
Nor his owne vision houlds what it doth catch:
Loe as a carefull huswife runnes to catch,
143: Loe as a carefull huswife runnes to catch
Shakespeare: Sonnets 143: Loe as a carefull huswife runnes to catch
Sets downe her babe and makes all swift dispatch
Which bountious guift thou shouldst in bounty cherrish,
Harsh, featurelesse, and rude, barrenly perrish,
A vengfull canker eate him vp to death.
And to his robbry had annext thy breath,
Yet him for this, my loue no whit disdaineth,
Suns of the world may staine, whe[n] heauens sun staineth.
Which steales mens eyes and womens soules amaseth.
Gilding the obiect where-vpon it gazeth,
A third nor red, nor white, had stolne of both,
Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth
Poore soule the center of my sinfull earth,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 146: Poore soule the center of my sinfull earth
146: Poore soule the center of my sinfull earth
For I am shamd by that which I bring forth,
And he that calls on thee, let him bring forth
Alack what pouerty my Muse brings forth,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 103: Alack what pouerty my Muse brings forth
103: Alack what pouerty my Muse brings forth
The argument all bare is of more worth
And so should you, to loue things nothing worth.
Be thou the tenth Muse, ten times more in worth
The painefull warrier famosed for worth,
That she might thinke me some vntuterd youth,
To see his actiue childe do deeds of youth,
And chide thy beauty, and thy straying youth,
Time doth transfixe the florish set on youth,
These blenches gaue my heart an other youth,
And so of you, beautious and louely youth,
Where thou art forst to breake a two-fold truth:
Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth.
Shakespeare: Sonnets 138: When my loue sweares that she is made of truth
138: When my loue sweares that she is made of truth
When my loue sweares that she is made of truth,
Most true it is, that I haue lookt on truth
When that shall vade, by verse distils your truth.
Feedes on the rarities of natures truth,
But for his theft in pride of all his growth
Or what strong hand can hold his swift foote back,
O fearefull meditation, where alack,
Of bird, of flowre, or shape which it doth lack,
At such who not borne faire no beauty lack,
If Nature (soueraine misteres ouer wrack)
Oh let me suffer (being at your beck)
And patience tame, to sufferance bide each check,
But all alone stands hugely pollitick,
I gesse one angel in an others hel.
I may be straight though they them-selues be beuel
And would corrupt my saint to be a diuel:
Or say with Princes if it shal go wel
The worser spirit a woman collour’d il.
Whence hast thou this becomming of things il,
Which in my bosomes shop is hanging stil,
As ile my selfe disgrace, knowing thy wil,
For nothing this wide Vniuerse I call,
No want of conscience hold it that I call,
No loue, my loue, that thou maist true loue call,
Forgot vpon your dearest loue to call,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 117: Accuse me thus, that I haue scanted all
117: Accuse me thus, that I haue scanted all
Accuse me thus, that I haue scanted all,
Her loue, for whose deare loue I rise and fall.
Take all my loues, my loue, yea take them all,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 40: Take all my loues, my loue, yea take them all
40: Take all my loues, my loue, yea take them all
For men diseasd, but I my Mistrisse thrall,
Which from loues fire tooke heat perpetuall,
Saue thou my Rose, in it thou art my all.
Then you shall heare the surly sullen bell
And that vnfaire which fairely doth excell:
I am to waite, though waiting so be hell,
To shun the heauen that leads men to this hell.
Yet nor the laies of birds, nor the sweet smell
I will not prayse that purpose not to sell.
And haplie of our old acquaintance tell.
Thy lookes should nothing thence, but sweetnesse tell.
But he that writes of you, if he can tell,
Then of your graces and your gifts to tell.
Nor can I fortune to breefe mynuits tell;
Suspect I may, yet not directly tell,
Could make me any summers story tell:
Noe, I am that I am, and they that leuell
As those whose beauties proudly make them cruell,
Thy selfe thy foe, to thy sweet selfe too cruell:
The louely gaze where euery eye doth dwell
Leane penurie within that Pen doth dwell,
Thy sweet beloued name no more shall dwell,
From this vile world with vildest wormes to dwell:
That in thy face sweet loue should euer dwell,
Thou art the fairest and most precious Iewell.
Feed’st thy lights flame with selfe substantiall fewell,
Not blame your pleasure be it ill or well.
To marre the subiect that before was well,
All this the world well knowes yet none knowes well,
Let them say more that like of heare-say well,
Thinke all but one, and me in that one Will.
So true a foole is loue, that in your Will,
And then thou louest me for my name is Will.
So will I pray that thou maist haue thy Will,
So thou beeing rich in Will adde to thy Will,
Sweare to thy blind soule that I was thy Will,
Who euer hath her wish, thou hast thy Will,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 135: Who euer hath her wish, thou hast thy Will
135: Who euer hath her wish, thou hast thy Will
Some in their garments though new-fangled ill:
Feeding on that which doth preserue the ill,
And cadiv.1.titleue-good attending Captaine ill.
Thus farre for loue, my loue-sute sweet fullfill.
Shakespeare: Sonnets 112: Your loue and pittie doth th’impression fill
112: Your loue and pittie doth th’impression fill
Your loue and pittie doth th’impression fill,
So loue be thou, although too daie thou fill
As tender nurse her babe from faring ill,
And hauing climb’d the steepe vp heauenly hill,
There is such strength and warrantise of skill,
And Folly (Doctor-like) controuling skill,
Let no vnkinde, no faire beseechers kill,
She keepes thee to this purpose, that her skill,
91: Some glory in their birth, some in their skill
Shakespeare: Sonnets 91: Some glory in their birth, some in their skill
Some glory in their birth, some in their skill,
For through the Painter must you see his skill,
And you must liue drawne by your owne sweet skill.
May time disgrace, and wretched mynuit kill.
Too morrow see againe, and doe not kill
(Though you doe any thing) he thinkes no ill.
Thou canst not (loue) disgrace me halfe so ill,
For what care I who calles me well or ill,
More then enough am I that vexe thee still,
To giue away your selfe, keeps your selfe still,
Which like two spirits do sugiest me still,
The sea all water, yet receiues raine still,
My loue is as a feauer longing still,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 147: My loue is as a feauer longing still
147: My loue is as a feauer longing still
If thou turne back and my loude crying still.
My toung-tide Muse in manners holds her still,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 85: My toung-tide Muse in manners holds her still
85: My toung-tide Muse in manners holds her still
Make but my name thy loue, and loue that still,
Thou wilt restore to be my comfort still:
Yet mortall lookes adore his beauty still,
To win me soone to hell my femall euill,
Reserue their Character with goulden quill,
As I not for my selfe, but for thee will,
And I my selfe am morgag’d to thy will,
That heauie Saturne laught and leapt with him.
When proud pide Aprill (drest in all his trim)
But my fiue wits, nor my fiue sences can
Who leaues vnswai’d the likenesse of a man,
You still shall liue (such vertue hath my Pen)
And death once dead, ther’s no more dying then.
For if you were by my vnkindnesse shaken
That lookes on tempests and is neuer shaken;
Of him, my selfe, and thee I am forsaken,
Whose worths vnknowne, although his hight be taken.
And I a tyrant haue no leasure taken
Me from my selfe thy cruell eye hath taken,
Dost thou desire my slumbers should be broken,
And like vnlettered clarke still crie Amen,
Can make you liue your selfe in eies of men,
Where breath most breaths, euen in the mouths of men.
For beauties patterne to succeding men.
So shalt thou feed on death, that feeds on men,
Exceeded by the hight of happier men.
In polisht forme of well refined pen.
Nor draw noe lines there with thine antique pen,
Which this (Times pensel or my pupill pen)
61: Is it thy wil, thy Image should keepe open
Shakespeare: Sonnets 61: Is it thy wil, thy Image should keepe open
Is it thy wil, thy Image should keepe open
Deserues the trauaile of a worthier pen,
And though they be out-stript by euery pen,
Although in me each part will be forgotten.
Or you suruiue when I in earth am rotten,
Nor that full Starre that vshers in the Eauen
And truly not the morning Sun of Heauen
And do’st him grace when clouds doe blot the heauen:
When sparkling stars twire not thou guil’st th’ eauen.
Distil’d from Lymbecks foule as hell within,
Still loosing when I saw my selfe to win?
Then can I greeue at greeuances fore-gon,
Sap checkt with frost and lustie leau’s quite gon.
And mocke you with me after I am gon.
Hung with the trophies of my louers gon,
With shifting change as is false womens fashion,
Haste thou the Master Mistris of my passion,
Potions of Eysell gainst my strong infection,
Nor double pennance to correct correction.
The bloody spurre cannot prouoke him on,
Now proud as an inioyer, and anon
So thou, thy selfe out-going in thy noon:
On whom froun’st thou that I doe faune vpon.
For neuer resting time leads Summer on,
Triumph in loue, flesh staies no farther reason,
My nobler part to my grose bodies treason,
Are windowes to my brest, where-through the Sun
If snow be white, why then her breasts are dun:
By their rancke thoughtes, my deedes must not be shown
Loues eye is not so true as all mens: no,
And I by this wil be a gainer too,
That euery toung saies beauty should looke so.
Compar’d with losse of thee, will not seeme so.
Though not to loue, yet loue to tell me so,
Made in pursut and in possession so,
To one, of one, still such, and euer so.
When to vn-seeing eyes thy shade shines so?
Die to themselues. Sweet Roses doe not so,
What meanes the world to say it is not so?
The hand that writ it, for I loue you so,
You had a Father, let your Son say so.
Loue is a Babe, then might I not say so
A blisse in proofe and proud and very wo,
Whilst many Nymphes that vou’d chast life to keep,
And to his pallat doth prepare the cup.
And my great minde most kingly drinkes it vp,
But when from high-most pich with wery car,
But day doth daily draw my sorrowes longer,
And night doth nightly make greefes length seeme |(stronger
Thou doost loue her, because thou knowst I loue her,
Suffring my friend for my sake to approoue her,
And each doth good turnes now vnto the other,
Thou doo’st beguile the world, vnblesse some mother.
Or heart in loue with sighes himselfe doth smother;
Resembling sier, and child, and happy mother,
Now is the time that face should forme an other,
Marke how one string sweet husband to an other,
Euen those that said I could not loue you deerer,
My most full flame should afterwards burne cleerer.
Growes fairer then at first, more strong, far greater.
What’s in the braine that Inck may character,
108: What’s in the braine that Inck may character
Shakespeare: Sonnets 108: What’s in the braine that Inck may character
What’s new to speake, what now to register,
Thus haue I had thee as a dreame doth flatter,
In sleepe a King, but waking no such matter.
That better is, by euil still made better.
In the distraction of this madding feuer?
Whilst it hath thought it selfe so blessed neuer?
These poore rude lines of thy deceased Louer:
When that churle death my bones with dust shall couer
Doest hould times fickle glasse, his fickle, hower:
Whose action is no stronger then a flower?
But sad mortallity ore-swaies their power,
For since each hand hath put on Natures power,
O thou my louely Boy who in thy power,
126: O thou my louely Boy who in thy power
Shakespeare: Sonnets 126: O thou my louely Boy who in thy power
As those gould candells fixt in heauens ayer:
Oh though I loue what others doe abhor,
Haue I not seene dwellers on forme and fauor
For compound sweet; Forgoing simple sauor,
When loue conuerted from the thing it was
Nor it nor noe remembrance what it was.
And thence this slaunder as I thinke proceeds.
That in my minde thy worst all best exceeds?
And they are ritch, and ransome all ill deeds.
The guiltie goddesse of my harmfull deeds,
That in the very refuse of thy deeds,
In nothing art thou blacke saue in thy deeds,
And that in guesse they measure by thy deeds,
Ah but those teares are pearle which thy loue sheeds,
Then publick meanes which publick manners breeds.
To thy faire flower ad the rancke smell of weeds,
Lillies that fester, smell far worse then weeds.
Oh truant Muse what shalbe thy amends,
101: Oh truant Muse what shalbe thy amends
Shakespeare: Sonnets 101: Oh truant Muse what shalbe thy amends
Both truth and beauty on my loue depends:
The wiry concord that mine eare confounds,
They do but sweetly chide thee, who confounds
If the true concord of well tuned sounds,
Vpon that blessed wood whose motion sounds
Three theams in one, which wondrous scope affords.
To euery Himne that able spirit affords,
Faire, kinde and true, varrying to other words,
My loue lookes fresh, and death to me subscribes,
While he insults ore dull and speachlesse tribes.
They are the Lords and owners of their faces,
Such heauenly touches nere toucht earthly faces.
And in fresh numbers number all your graces,
They rightly do inherrit heauens graces,
For sweetest things turne sowrest by their deedes,
Which alters when it alteration findes,
Let me not to the marriage of true mindes
116: Let me not to the marriage of true mindes
Shakespeare: Sonnets 116: Let me not to the marriage of true mindes
That I haue frequent binne with vnknown mindes,
That I haue hoysted saile to al the windes
I thinke good thoughts, whilst other write good wordes,
Thou hast past by the ambush of young daies,
Oh sure I am the wits of former daies,
And stops his pipe in growth of riper daies:
If my slight Muse doe please these curious daies,
That tongue that tells the story of thy daies,
Painting my age with beauty of thy daies,
Where all the treasure of thy lusty daies;
When I was wont to greet it with my laies,
You liue in this, and dwell in louers eies.
To finde where your true Image pictur’d lies,
Making a famine where aboundance lies,
Then being askt, where all thy beautie lies,
But found no cure, the bath for my helpe lies,
The age to come would say this Poet lies,
Her prettie lookes haue beene mine enemies,
Or on my frailties why are frailer spies;
And trouble deafe heauen with my bootlesse cries,
That they else-where might dart their iniuries:
So all their praises are but prophesies
Vnlearned in the worlds false subtilties.
But no such Roses see I in her cheekes,
Then in the breath that from my Mistres reekes.
Loue alters not with his breefe houres and weekes,
Why of eyes falsehood hast thou forged hookes,
If eyes corrupt by ouer-partiall lookes,
And proud of many, liues vpon his gaines?
And that is this, and this with thee remaines.
The worth of that, is that which it containes,
Beggerd of blood to blush through liuely vaines,
Sometime too hot the eye of heauen shines,
And euery faire from faire some-time declines,
Kill me with spights yet we must not be foes.
And therefore from my face she turnes my foes,
Applying feares to hopes, and hopes to feares,
That is so vext with watching and with teares?
What potions haue I drunke of Syren teares
119: What potions haue I drunke of Syren teares
Shakespeare: Sonnets 119: What potions haue I drunke of Syren teares
The sunne it selfe sees not, till heauen cleeres.
Now stand you on the top of happie houres,
That it nor growes with heat, nor drownes with showres.
As the perfumed tincture of the Roses,
When sommers breath their masked buds discloses:
And Sommers greene all girded vp in sheaues
When lofty trees I see barren of leaues,
To leaue poore me, thou hast the strength of lawes,
Deuouring time blunt thou the Lyons pawes,
19: Deuouring time blunt thou the Lyons pawes
Shakespeare: Sonnets 19: Deuouring time blunt thou the Lyons pawes
Plucke the keene teeth from the fierce Tygers yawes,
Lasciuious grace, in whom all il wel showes,
That this huge stage presenteth nought but showes
Let me excuse thee, ah my loue well knowes,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 15: When I consider euery thing that growes
When I consider euery thing that growes
15: When I consider euery thing that growes
Roote pittie in thy heart that when it growes,
Nor gates of steele so strong but time decayes?
Some fresher stampe of the time bettering dayes.
Against the wrackfull siedge of battring dayes,
For we which now behold these present dayes,
Commanded by the motion of thine eyes.
That hath his windowes glazed with thine eyes:
Shakespeare: Sonnets 141: In faith I doe not loue thee with mine eyes
In faith I doe not loue thee with mine eyes,
141: In faith I doe not loue thee with mine eyes
137: Thou blinde foole loue, what doost thou to mine eyes
Shakespeare: Sonnets 137: Thou blinde foole loue, what doost thou to mine eyes
Thou blinde foole loue, what doost thou to mine eyes,
There liues more life in one of your faire eyes,
And for they look’d but with deuining eyes,
(A closet neuer pearst with christall eyes)
To say within thine owne deepe sunken eyes,
If I could write the beauty of your eyes,
When in disgrace with Fortune and mens eyes,
29: When in disgrace with Fortune and mens eyes
Shakespeare: Sonnets 29: When in disgrace with Fortune and mens eyes
For why should others false adulterat eyes
But thou contracted to thine owne bright eyes,
And sayes in him their faire appearance lyes.
I do beleeue her though I know she lyes,
They know what beautie is, see where it lyes,
Creepe in twixt vowes, and change decrees of Kings,
That then I skorne to change my state with Kings.
Diuert strong mindes to th’ course of altring things:
For thy sweet loue remembred such welth brings,
I see, a better state to me belongs
Then need I not to feare the worst of wrongs,
151: Loue is too young to know what conscience is
Shakespeare: Sonnets 151: Loue is too young to know what conscience is
Loue is too young to know what conscience is,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 59: If their bee nothing new, but that which is
If their bee nothing new, but that which is,
59: If their bee nothing new, but that which is
My sawsie barke (inferior farre to his)
All men make faults, and euen I in this,
O least your true loue may seeme falce in this,
Since sausie Iackes so happy are in this,
For she hath no exchecker now but his,
But since your worth (wide as the Ocean is)
Why should he liue, now nature banckrout is,
My name be buried where my body is,
Lou’s not Times foole, though rosie lips and cheeks
DjVu Editions E-books
Sweet theefe whence didst thou steale thy sweet that |(smels
Whereto th’inuiting time our fashion calls:
It suffers not in smilinge pomp, nor falls
Which on thy soft cheeke for complexion dwells?
With Sunne and Moone, with earth and seas rich gems:
That heauens ayre in this huge rondure hems,
And situation with those dancing chips,
Making dead wood more blest then liuing lips,
Whilst I whome fortune of such tryumph bars
Let those who are in fauor with their stars,
25: Let those who are in fauor with their stars
Shakespeare: Sonnets 25: Let those who are in fauor with their stars
Which workes on leases of short numbred howers,
With vertuous wish would beare your liuing flowers,
When I shall see thee frowne on my defects,
Cauld to that audite by aduis’d respects,
To the wide world and all her fading sweets:
Sonnets
In praise of Ladies dead, and louely Knights,
I see discridiv.1.titleons of the fairest wights,
Thy beautie, and thy yeares full well befits,
The humble salue, which wounded bosomes fits
My deepest sence, how hard true sorrow hits,
That on himselfe such murdrous shame commits.
41: Those pretty wrongs that liberty commits
Shakespeare: Sonnets 41: Those pretty wrongs that liberty commits
Those pretty wrongs that liberty commits,
No loue toward others in that bosome sits
But reckening time, whose milliond accidents
That haue prophan’d their scarlet ornaments,
Robd others beds reuenues of their rents.
Tan sacred beautie, blunt the sharp’st intents,
But you shall shine more bright in these contents
Thy bosome is indeared with all hearts,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 31: Thy bosome is indeared with all hearts
31: Thy bosome is indeared with all hearts
And there raignes Loue and all Loues louing parts,
Which hides your life, and shewes not halfe your parts:
If it were fild with your most high deserts?
To thy sweete will making addition thus.
And Will too boote, and Will in ouer-plus,
Shall will in others seeme right gracious,
Wilt thou whose will is large and spatious,
Mine owne true loue that doth my rest defeat,
O no, thy loue though much, is not so great,
The barren tender of a Poets debt:
Yet this shal I nere know but liue in doubt,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 70: That thou are blam’d shall not be thy defect
70: That thou are blam’d shall not be thy defect
That thou are blam’d shall not be thy defect,
When all my best doth worship thy defect,
Which though it alter not loues sole effect,
Me for my dombe thoughts, speaking in effect.
Points on me gratiously with faire aspect,
What merrit do I in my selfe respect,
In our two loues there is but one respect,
Then others, for the breath of words respect,
To show me worthy of their sweet respect,
The ornament of beauty is suspect,
The sommers flowre is to the sommer sweet,
Chiding that tongue that euer sweet,
Leese but their show, their substance still liues sweet.
Describe Adonis and the counterfet,
Or captaine Iewells in the carconet.
On Hellens cheeke all art of beautie set,
Since sildom comming in the long yeare set,
And therefore to your faire no painting set,
And many maiden gardens yet vnset,
Then were not summers distillation left
Beauties effect with beauty were bereft,
Inioyd no sooner but dispised straight,
Vpon thy side, against my selfe ile fight,
Crooked eclipses gainst his glory fight,
And sweets growne common loose their deare delight.
And in some perfumes is there more delight,
They weare but sweet, but figures of delight:
Possessing or pursuing no delight
37: As a decrepit father takes delight
As a decrepit father takes delight,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 37: As a decrepit father takes delight
Yet doth it steale sweet houres from loues delight,
Awakes my heart, to hearts and eyes delight.
When thou shalt be disposde to set me light,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 88: When thou shalt be disposde to set me light
88: When thou shalt be disposde to set me light
Natiuity once in the maine of light.
When thou thy selfe dost giue inuention light?
How can I then returne in happy plight
28: How can I then returne in happy plight
Shakespeare: Sonnets 28: How can I then returne in happy plight
To the cleere day with thy much cleerer light,
Darkning thy powre to lend base subiects light.
Shakespeare: Sonnets 7: Loe in the Orient when the gracious light
7: Loe in the Orient when the gracious light
Loe in the Orient when the gracious light,
O none, vnlesse this miracle haue might,
Oh from what powre hast thou this powrefull might,
To morrow sharpned in his former might.
Thy pyramyds buylt vp with newer might
At first the very worst of fortunes might.
Ore-charg’d with burthen of mine owne loues might:
And in the praise thereof spends all his might,
To speake of that which giues thee all thy might?
What needst thou wound with cunning when thy might
To change your day of youth to sullied night,
So flatter I the swart complexiond night,
Then when her mournefull himns did hush the night,
Hath trauaild on to Ages steepie night,
The mountaine, or the sea, the day, or night:
Who art as black as hell, as darke as night.
For precious friends hid in deaths dateles night,
And see the braue day sunck in hidious night,
When daies oppression is not eazd by night,
No, neither he, nor his compiers by night
Which like a iewell (hunge in gastly night)
My heauy eielids to the weary night?
Though in our liues a seperable spight,
When other pettie griefes haue done their spight,
So I, made lame by Fortunes dearest spight
That censures falsely what they see aright?
For I haue sworne thee faire, and thought thee bright,
Then thou whose shaddow shaddowes doth make bright,
That in black inck my loue may still shine bright.
As any mothers childe, though not so bright
I tell the Day to please him thou art bright,
And giuen to time your owne deare purchas’d right,
The perfect ceremony of loues right,
My heart, mine eye the freedome of that right,
Which haue no correspondence with true sight,
To make me giue the lie to my true sight,
Are vanishing, or vanisht out of sight,
Doth homage to his new appearing sight,
They are but dressings of a former sight:
Which should transport me farthest from your sight.
Some-time all ful with feasting on your sight,
And mone th’expence of many a vannisht sight.
For if it see the rud’st or gentlest sight,
How to deuide the conquest of thy sight,
Worthy perusal stand against thy sight,
While shadowes like to thee do mocke my sight?
Sets you most rich in youth before my sight,
Tempteth my better angel from my sight,
Or if they sleepe, thy picture in my sight
Tell me thou lou’st else-where; but in my sight,
Saue that my soules imaginary sight
Shakespeare: Sonnets 44: If the dull substance of my flesh were thought
44: If the dull substance of my flesh were thought
If the dull substance of my flesh were thought,
Oh then voutsafe me but this louing thought,
Nor dare I question with my iealious thought,
30: When to the Sessions of sweet silent thought
Shakespeare: Sonnets 30: When to the Sessions of sweet silent thought
When to the Sessions of sweet silent thought,
But ah, thought kills me that I am not thought
But like a sad slaue stay and thinke of nought
A dearer birth then this his loue had brought:
For then dispight of space I would be brought,
But that so much of earth and water wrought,
I sigh the lacke of many a thing I sought,
Much liker then your painted counterfeit:
Your owne glasse showes you, when you looke in it.
Thy merrit hath my dutie strongly knit;
That may expresse my loue, or thy deare merit?
Which hath not figur’d to thee my true spirit,
O learne to read what silent loue hath writ,
Let him but coppy what in you is writ,
Intitled in their parts, do crowned sit,
Shifts but his place, for still the world inioyes it
And kept vnvsde the vser so destroyes it:
And more, much more then in my verse can sit,
May make seeme bare, in wanting words to shew it;
To heare with eies belongs to loues fine wit.
In thy soules thought (all naked) will bestow it:
For whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or wit,
And such a counter-part shall fame his wit,
To witnesse duty, not to shew my wit.
Shakespeare: Sonnets 89: Say that thou didst forsake mee for some falt
89: Say that thou didst forsake mee for some falt
Say that thou didst forsake mee for some falt,
Speake of my lamenesse, and I straight will halt:
Cries to catch her whose busie care is bent,
No it was buylded far from accident,
But that thou none lou’st is most euident:
Who for thy selfe art so vnprouident
Thine owne sweet argument, to excellent,
Thou that art now the worlds fresh ornament,
Whereon the Stars in secret influence comment.
Holds in perfection but a little moment.
And giues thy pen both skill and argument.
I grant (sweet loue) thy louely argument
Faire, kinde, and true, is all my argument,
And you and loue are still my argument:
Shakespeare: Sonnets 55: Not marble, nor the guilded monument
55: Not marble, nor the guilded monument
Not marble, nor the guilded monument,
And thou in this shalt finde thy monument,
When tyrants crests and tombs of brasse are spent.
And gaine by ills thrise more then I haue spent.
Pittifull thriuors in their gazing spent.
And in this change is my inuention spent,
Spending againe what is already spent:
In gentle numbers time so idely spent,
Lose all, and more by paying too much rent
Vnder the blow of thralled discontent,
Not prizing her poore infants discontent;
Within thine owne bud buriest thy content,
So I returne rebukt to my content,
Yet what of thee thy Poet doth inuent,
How can my Muse want subiect to inuent
38: How can my Muse want subiect to inuent
Shakespeare: Sonnets 38: How can my Muse want subiect to inuent
No shape so true, no truth of such account,
As I all other in all worths surmount.
Doe I not thinke on thee when I forgot
That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot,
Oh what a mansion haue those vices got,
But whats so blessed faire that feares no blot,
Where beauties vaile doth couer euery blot,
Why should my heart thinke that a seuerall plot,
149: Canst thou O cruell, say I loue thee not
Shakespeare: Sonnets 149: Canst thou O cruell, say I loue thee not
Canst thou O cruell, say I loue thee not,
Nay if you read this line, remember not,
Or mine eyes seeing this, say this is not
Thou maist be falce, and yet I know it not.
Desire is death, which Phisick did except.
Angry that his prescridiv.1.titleons are not kept
Vse power with power, and slay me not by Art,
Or at the least, so long as braine and heart
For it no forme deliuers to the heart
A quest of thoughts, all tennants to the heart,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 109: O neuer say that I was false of heart
O neuer say that I was false of heart,
109: O neuer say that I was false of heart
And my hearts right, their inward loue of heart.
Whose strengths abondance weakens his own heart:
But you like none, none you for constant heart.
O let it then as well beseeme thy heart
When I am some-time absent from thy heart,
Noe, let me be obsequious in thy heart,
Thy beauties forme in table of my heart,
Is but the seemely rayment of my heart,
It is so grounded inward in my heart.
That thy vnkindnesse layes vpon my heart,
And to the painted banquet bids my heart:
And constant stars in them I read such art
They draw but what they see, know not the hart.
For well thou know’st to my deare doting hart
Which is not mixt with seconds, knows no art,
And in his thoughts of loue doth share a part.
From whence at pleasure thou maist come and part,
As thus, mine eyes due is their outward part,
As easie might I from my selfe depart,
Then what could death doe if thou should’st depart,
In all externall grace you haue some part,
Then nigard truth would willingly impart:
Of his quick obiects hath the minde no part,
Til each to raz’d obliuion yeeld his part
Who with his feare is put besides his part,
The cleere eyes moyitie, and the deare hearts part.
To guard the lawfull reasons on thy part,
And sute thy pitty like in euery part.
And all my soule, and al my euery part;
Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art
Within the knowledge of mine own desart,
And perspectiue it is best Painters art.
Saue where thou art not, though I feele thou art,
For still temptation followes where thou art.
How can I then be elder then thou art?
Ten times thy selfe were happier then thou art,
131: Thou art as tiranous, so as thou art
Shakespeare: Sonnets 131: Thou art as tiranous, so as thou art
Thou art as tiranous, so as thou art,
To doe more for me then mine owne desert,
If from thy selfe, to store thou wouldst conuert:
How farre a moderne quill doth come to short,
As thou being mine, mine is thy good report.
As thou being mine, mine is thy good report.
Naming thy name, blesses an ill report.
And therefore haue I slept in your report,
Some say thy grace is youth and gentle sport,
(Making lasciuious comments on thy sport)
Thou makst faults graces, that to thee resort:
But doe not so, I loue thee in such sort,
But doe not so, I loue thee in such sort,
Better becomes the gray cheeks of th’ East,
With my loues picture then my eye doth feast,
With what I most inioy contented least,
Made more or les by thy continuall hast:
If thou wilt leaue me, do not leaue me last,
And gilded honor shamefully misplast,
And hauing thee, of all mens pride I boast.
As victors of my silence cannot boast,
Not wondring at the present, nor the past,
I sommon vp remembrance of things past,
As after Sun-set fadeth in the West,
Doth halfe that glory to the sober West
Then giue me welcome, next my heauen the best,
Although she knowes my dayes are past the best,
All these I better in one generall best.
Then in the blazon of sweet beauties best,
Creating euery bad a perfect best
Might I not then say now I loue you best,
To make of monsters, and things indigest,
So is the time that keepes you as my chest,
Thee haue I not lockt vp in any chest,
To make some speciall instant speciall blest,
But be contented when that fell arest,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 74: But be contented when that fell arest
74: But be contented when that fell arest
And domb presagers of my speaking brest,
Euen to thy pure and most most louing brest.
Within the gentle closure of my brest,
The boy for triall needes would touch my brest,
Wherein it findes a ioy aboue the rest,
Crowning the present, doubting of the rest:
My life hath in this line some interest,
That am debard the benifit of rest?
Deaths second selfe that seals vp all in rest.
And frantick madde with euer-more vnrest,
But day by night and night by day oprest.
On both sides thus is simple truth supprest:
More then that tonge that more hath more exprest.
I see their antique Pen would haue exprest,
At randon from the truth vainely exprest.
Featur’d like him, like him with friends possest,
By wilfull taste of what thy selfe refusest.
I cannot blame thee, for my loue thou vsest,
In one of thine, from that which thou departest,
Thou maist call thine, when thou from youth conuertest,
But yet be blam’d, if thou this selfe deceauest
And thether hied a sad distemperd guest.
An other time mine eye is my hearts guest,
Then if for my loue, thou my loue receiuest,
Whose fresh repaire if now thou not renewest,
3: Looke in thy glasse and tell the face thou vewest
Shakespeare: Sonnets 3: Looke in thy glasse and tell the face thou vewest
Looke in thy glasse and tell the face thou vewest,
Of thee, thy record neuer can be mist:
Haue facultie by nature to subsist,
Of publike honour and proud titles bost,
Richer then wealth, prouder then garments cost,
He nor that affable familiar ghost
And all my honest faith in thee is lost
When I breake twenty: I am periur’d most,
Vnlookt for ioy in that I honour most;
Make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleet’st,
But wherefore sayes she not she is vniust?
Is lust in action, and till action, lust
Who hast by wayning growne, and therein shou’st,
Each trifle vnder truest barres to thrust,
From hands of falsehood, in sure wards of trust?
O loues best habit is in seeming trust,
Sauage, extreame, rude, cruell, not to trust,
Thy louers withering, as thy sweet selfe grow’st.
When in eternall lines to time thou grow’st,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 11: As fast as thou shalt wane so fast thou grow’st
As fast as thou shalt wane so fast thou grow’st,
11: As fast as thou shalt wane so fast thou grow’st
And that fresh bloud which yongly thou bestow’st,
Nor loose possession of that faire thou ow’st,
How oft when thou my musike musike playst,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 128: How oft when thou my musike musike playst
128: How oft when thou my musike musike playst
With thy sweet fingers when thou gently swayst,
And that which gouernes me to goe about,
O how shall summers hunny breath hold out,
Till my bad angel fire my good one out.
Seemes seeing, but effectually is out:
Truth needs no collour with his collour fixt,
But best is best, if neuer intermixt.
Past reason hated as a swollowed bayt,
Then this rich praise, that you alone, are you,
Drugs poyson him that so fell sicke of you.
O know sweet loue I alwaies write of you,
And all in war with Time for loue of you
Or whether doth my minde being crown’d with you
Incapable of more repleat, with you,
But that is in my thought, whose loue to you
Is poorely immitated after you,
Whilst I (my soueraine) watch the clock for you,
And liue no more to shame nor me, nor you.
Bound for the prize of (all to precious) you,
And sau’d my life saying not you.
And steale dead seeing of his liuing hew?
Of different flowers in odor and in hew,
Thou art as faire in knowledge as in hew,
Returne of loue, more blest may be the view.
And made my selfe a motley to the view,
69: Those parts of thee that the worlds eye doth view
Those parts of thee that the worlds eye doth view,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 69: Those parts of thee that the worlds eye doth view
Presents their shaddoe to my sightles view,
No maruaile then though I mistake my view,
And therefore art inforc’d to seeke anew,
And ruin’d loue when it is built anew
Which parts the shore, where two contracted new,
And you in Grecian tires are painted new:
May still seeme loue to me, though alter’d new:
Makes blacke night beautious, and her old face new.
So all my best is dressing old words new,
Made old offences of affections new.
As he takes from you, I ingraft you new.
Robbing no ould to dresse his beauty new,
Which should example where your equall grew,
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew:
Making their tombe the wombe wherein they grew?
I hate, from hate away she threw,
When thou reuewest this, thou doest reuew,
Ioyne with the spight of fortune, make me bow.
Needes must I vnder my transgression bow,
But that wild musick burthens euery bow,
Then do thy office Muse, I teach thee how,
The one doth shaddow of your beautie show,
Nor my beloued as an Idoll show,
But for their virtue only is their show,
That you your selfe being extant well might show,
If thy sweet vertue answere not thy show.
But why thy odor matcheth not thy show,
If some suspect of ill maskt not thy show,
The wrinckles which thy glasse will truly show,
How would thy shadowes forme, forme happy show,
So you ore-greene my bad, my good alow?
Then can I drowne an eye (vn-vs’d to flow)
Him in thy course vntainted doe allow,
Since from thee going, he went wilfull slow,
Vnmooued, could, and to temptation slow:
When swift extremity can seeme but slow,
And nothing stands but for his sieth to mow.
Shakespeare: Sonnets 120: That you were once vnkind be-friends mee now
120: That you were once vnkind be-friends mee now
That you were once vnkind be-friends mee now,
The region cloude hath mask’d him from me now.
In winged speed no motion shall I know,
I loue to heare her speake, yet well I know,
As if by some instinct the wretch did know
And you in euery blessed shape we know.
No newes but health from their Phisitions know.
Thou by thy dyals shady stealth maist know,
O none but vnthrifts, deare my loue you know,
63: Against my loue shall be as I am now
Shakespeare: Sonnets 63: Against my loue shall be as I am now
Against my loue shall be as I am now
Thy youthes proud liuery so gaz’d on now,
When beauty liu’d and dy’ed as flowers do now,
Euen such a beauty as you maister now.
Shakespeare: Sonnets 90: Then hate me when thou wilt, if euer, now
90: Then hate me when thou wilt, if euer, now
Then hate me when thou wilt, if euer, now,
To make him seeme long hence, as he showes now.
Not that the summer is lesse pleasant now
O carue not with thy howers my loues faire brow,
Of hand, of foote, of lip, of eye, of brow,
Or durst inhabit on a liuing brow:
And delues the paralels in beauties brow,
When houres haue dreind his blood and fild his brow
2: When fortie Winters shall beseige thy brow
Shakespeare: Sonnets 2: When fortie Winters shall beseige thy brow
When fortie Winters shall beseige thy brow,
Which vulgar scandall stampt vpon my brow,
With all triumphant splendor on my brow,
To giue full growth to that which still doth grow.
Speaking of worth, what worth in you doth grow,
The solue is this, that thou doest common grow.
And die as fast as they see others grow,
How like Eaues apple doth thy beauty grow,
To linger out a purposd ouer-throw.
Giue not a windy night a rainie morrow,
Ah doe not, when my heart hath scapte this sorrow,
Without this follie, age, and could decay,
But let your loue euen with my life decay.
Where wastfull time debateth with decay
Or state it selfe confounded, to decay,
And in mine owne loues strength seeme to decay,
If any, be a Satire to decay,
Who lets so faire a house fall to decay,
And fortifie your selfe in your decay
The worst was this, my loue was my decay.
And swere that brightnesse doth not grace the day?
Like feeble age he reeleth from the day,
That follow’d it as gentle day,
By looking on thee in the liuing day?
In me thou seest the twi-light of such day,
18: Shall I compare thee to a Summers day?
Shall I compare thee to a Summers day?
Shakespeare: Sonnets 18: Shall I compare thee to a Summers day?
Against the stormy gusts of winters day
34: Why didst thou promise such a beautious day
Why didst thou promise such a beautious day,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 34: Why didst thou promise such a beautious day
Whereto al bonds do tie me day by day,
Thus do I pine and surfet day by day,
Painting thy outward walls so costlie gay?
Ere beauties dead fleece made another gay:
When I (perhaps) compounded am with clay,
Beautie no pensell, beauties truth to lay:
As with your shaddow I with these did play.
My soule doth tell my body that he may,
Wherein I should your great deserts repay,
Since what he owes thee, thou thy selfe doost pay,
My sinfull earth these rebbell powres that thee array,
How many Lambs might the sterne Wolfe betray,
For thou betraying me, I doe betray
That I might see what the old world could say,
Then thanke him not for that which he doth say,
Doth teach that ease and that repose to say
So I for feare of trust, forget to say,
That to my vse it might vn-vsed stay
In pursuit of the thing she would haue stay:
Through heauy sleepe on sightlesse eyes doth stay?
Which for memoriall still with thee shall stay.
And life no longer then thy loue will stay,
Then the conceit of this inconstant stay,
From limits farre remote, where thou doost stay,
Rise resty Muse, my loues sweet face suruay,
And shalt by fortune once more re-suruay:
The which he will not eu’ry hower suruay,
How many gazers mightst thou lead away,
And threescoore yeare would make the world away:
But doe thy worst to steale thy selfe away,
92: But doe thy worst to steale thy selfe away
Shakespeare: Sonnets 92: But doe thy worst to steale thy selfe away
One of her fethered creatures broake away,
Which by and by blacke night doth take away,
With out all bayle shall carry me away,
The right of sepulchers, were shorne away,
From heauen to hell is flowne away.
That Time will come and take my loue away.
Or gluttoning on all, or all away,
Then if he thriue and I be cast away,
Yet seem’d it Winter still, and you away,
50: How heauie doe I iourney on the way
How heauie doe I iourney on the way,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 50: How heauie doe I iourney on the way
From his low tract and looke an other way:
Shakespeare: Sonnets 150: With insufficiency my heart to sway
150: With insufficiency my heart to sway
With insufficiency my heart to sway,
How carefull was I when I tooke my way,
48: How carefull was I when I tooke my way
Shakespeare: Sonnets 48: How carefull was I when I tooke my way
To let bace cloudes ore-take me in my way,
Iniurious distance should not stop my way,
by
This brand she quenched in a coole Well by,
She caru’d thee for her seale, and ment therby,
Consum’d with that which it was nurrisht by.
Vpon thy selfe thy beauties legacy?
Growing a bath and healthfull remedy,
Whether we are mended, or where better they,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 52: So am I as the rich whose blessed key
So am I as the rich whose blessed key,
52: So am I as the rich whose blessed key
Yet then my iudgement knew no reason why,
Why lou’st thou that which thou receaust not gladly,
8: Musick to heare, why hear’st thou musick sadly
Musick to heare, why hear’st thou musick sadly,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 8: Musick to heare, why hear’st thou musick sadly
And yet it may be said I lou’d her deerely,
A losse in loue that touches me more neerely.
Hang on such thornes, and play as wantonly,
And yet me thinkes I haue Astronomy,
Guilding pale streames with heauenly alcumy:
Graunt if thou wilt, thou art belou’d of many,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 10: For shame deny that thou bear’st loue to any
10: For shame deny that thou bear’st loue to any
For shame deny that thou bear’st loue to any
But the defendant doth that plea deny,
Sweets with sweets warre not, ioy delights in ioy:
Or else receau’st with pleasure thine annoy?
Shakespeare: Sonnets 125: Wer’t ought to me I bore the canopy
Wer’t ought to me I bore the canopy,
125: Wer’t ought to me I bore the canopy
Bearing thy heart which I will keep so chary
O therefore loue be of thy selfe so wary,
Tyr’d with all these for restfull death I cry,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 66: Tyr’d with all these for restfull death I cry
66: Tyr’d with all these for restfull death I cry
Disdaines the tillage of thy husbandry?
That vse is not forbidden vsery,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 114: Drinke vp the monarks plague this flattery?
Drinke vp the monarks plague this flattery?
114: Drinke vp the monarks plague this flattery?
And broiles roote out the worke of masonry,
That thou in loosing me, shall win much glory:
That to his subiect lends not some small glory,
And were their braue state out of memory.
Full characterd with lasting memory,
That he shall neuer cut from memory
The liuing record of your memory.
His tender heire might beare his memory:
Vpon thy part I can set downe a story
In manies lookes, the falce hearts history
That you are you, so dignifies his story.
To beare loues wrong, then hates knowne iniury.
Without accusing you of iniury.
Of plagues, of dearths, or seasons quallity,
The basest weed out-braues his dignity:
Gainst death, and all obliuious emnity
Beyond all date, euen to eternity.
Or layd great bases for eternity,
Euen in the eyes of all posterity
Leauing thee liuing in posterity?
Of his selfe loue to stop posterity?
Selfe, so selfe louing were iniquity,
When I was certaine ore in-certainty,
Although thou steale thee all my pouerty:
Seruing with lookes his sacred maiesty,
