

- 41 -
- 133 -
- 134 -
- 40 -
- 43 -
- 44 -
- 42 -
- 132 -
- 39 -
- 35 -
- 136 -
- 34 -
- 137 -
- 135 -
- 38 -
- 36 -
- 37 -
- 131 -
( )
( )
- 128 -
- 52 -
- 54 -
- 126 -
- 53 -
- 127 -
- 51 -
- 47 -
- 130 -
- 45 -
- 46 -
- 50 -
- 129 -
- 48 -
- 49 -
- 33 -
- 18 -
- 146 -
- 17 -
- 147 -
- 20 -
- 21 -
- 19 -
- 145 -
- 16 -
- 12 -
- 13 -
- 150 -
- 11 -
- 15 -
- 148 -
- 149 -
- 14 -
- 22 -
- 30 -
- 140 -
- 29 -
- 141 -
- 32 -
- 138 -
- 31 -
- 139 -
- 28 -
- 24 -
- 143 -
- 144 -
- 23 -
- 142 -
- 27 -
- 25 -
- 26 -
- 107 -
- 84 -
- 108 -
- 83 -
- 86 -
- 105 -
- 85 -
- 106 -
- 82 -
- 111 -
- 79 -
- 77 -
- 78 -
- 109 -
- 81 -
- 110 -
- 80 -
- 87 -
- 95 -
- 100 -
- 101 -
- 94 -
- 97 -
- 98 -
- 96 -
- 99 -
- 93 -
- 89 -
- 103 -
- 88 -
- 104 -
- 102 -
- 92 -
- 90 -
- 91 -
- 112 -
- 61 -
- 62 -
- 60 -
- 121 -
- 64 -
- 65 -
- 63 -
- 120 -
- 122 -
- 56 -
- 124 -
- 55 -
- 125 -
- 58 -
- 59 -
- 57 -
- 123 -
- 119 -
- 73 -
- 74 -
- 72 -
- 115 -
- 113 -
- 76 -
- 114 -
- 75 -
- 71 -
- 67 -
- 68 -
- 66 -
- 118 -
- 70 -
- 116 -
- 69 -
- 117 -
- 9 -
- 8 -
1609 
- 154 -
- 6 -
- 153 -
- 152 -
- 10 -
- 4 -
- 3 -
- 151 -
- 155 -
- 156 -
- 7 -
- 5 -
A Crow that flies in heauens sweetest ayre.
A God in loue, to whom I am confin’d.
A blisse in proofe and proud and very wo,
Aboue a mortall pitch, that struck me dead?
Accuse me thus, that I haue scanted all,
117: Accuse me thus, that I haue scanted all
(A closet neuer pearst with christall eyes)
A datelesse liuely heat still to indure,
A dearer birth then this his loue had brought:
Admit impediments, loue is not loue
Aduantage on the Kingdome of the shoare,
After a thousand victories once foild,
After my death (deare loue) forget me quite,
Against confounding Ages cruell knife,
63: Against my loue shall be as I am now
Against my loue shall be as I am now
Against strange malladies a soueraigne cure:
Against that time do I insconce me here
49: Against that time (if euer that time come)
Against that time (if euer that time come)
Against that time when thou shalt strangely passe,
Against the stormy gusts of winters day
Against the wrackfull siedge of battring dayes,
Against this cumming end you should prepare,
Against thy reasons making no defence.
Ah but those teares are pearle which thy loue sheeds,
Ah doe not, when my heart hath scapte this sorrow,
Ah; if thou issulesse shalt hap to die,
67: Ah wherefore with infection should he liue
Ah wherefore with infection should he liue,
Ah yet doth beauty like a Dyall hand,
103: Alack what pouerty my Muse brings forth
Alack what pouerty my Muse brings forth,
110: Alas ’tis true, I haue gone here and there
Alas ’tis true, I haue gone here and there,
Alas why fearing of times tiranie,
A liquid prisoner pent in walls of glasse,
All dayes are nights to see till I see thee,
All frailties that besiege all kindes of blood,
All losses are restord, and sorrowes end.
All men are bad and in their badnesse raigne.
All men make faults, and euen I in this,
All mine was thine, before thou hadst this more:
All these I better in one generall best.
All this away, and me most wretched make.
All this the world well knowes yet none knowes well,
All toungs (the voice of soules) giue thee that end,
A losse in loue that touches me more neerely.
Although I sweare it to my selfe alone.
Although in me each part will be forgotten.
Although our vndeuided loues are one:
Although she knowes my dayes are past the best,
Although thou steale thee all my pouerty:
A maide of Dyans this aduantage found,
A man in hew all Hews in his controwling,
Am of my selfe, all tirant for thy sake?
Among a number one is reckon’d none.
And Arts with thy sweete graces graced be.
And Beautie slanderd with a bastard shame,
And Folly (Doctor-like) controuling skill,
And I am still with them, and they with thee.
And I a tyrant haue no leasure taken
And I by this wil be a gainer too,
And I my selfe am morgag’d to thy will,
And I will comment vpon that offence,
And Sommers greene all girded vp in sheaues
And Sommers lease hath all too short a date:
And Will too boote, and Will in ouer-plus,
And age in loue, loues not t’haue yeares told.
And all in war with Time for loue of you
And all my honest faith in thee is lost
And all my soule, and al my euery part;
And all the rest forgot for which he toild:
And all they foule that thy complexion lacke.
And all things turne to faire, that eies can see
And all those beauties whereof now he’s King
And all those friends which I thought buried.
And almost thence my nature is subdu’d
And arte made tung-tide by authoritie,
And barren rage of deaths eternall cold?
And beautie making beautifull old rime,
And being franck she lends to those are free:
And both for my sake lay on me this crosse,
And brasse eternall slaue to mortall rage.
And broiles roote out the worke of masonry,
And brought to medicine a healthfull state
And buds of marierom had stolne thy haire,
And burne the long liu’d Phaenix in her blood,
And by addition me of thee defeated,
And by and by cleane starued for a looke,
And by a part of all thy glory liue:
And by their verdict is determined
And cadiv.1.titleue-good attending Captaine ill.
And chide thy beauty, and thy straying youth,
And constant stars in them I read such art
And darkely bright, are bright in darke directed.
And death once dead, ther’s no more dying then.
And delues the paralels in beauties brow,
And die as fast as they see others grow,
And digge deep trenches in thy beauties field,
And doe not drop in for an after losse:
And domb presagers of my speaking brest,
And do so loue, yet when they haue deuisde,
And do’st him grace when clouds doe blot the heauen:
And do what ere thou wilt swift-footed time
And each doth good turnes now vnto the other,
And each (though enimes to ethers raigne)
And euen thence thou wilt be stolne I feare,
And euery faire from faire some-time declines,
And euery faire with his faire doth reherse,
And euery humor hath his adiunct pleasure,
And for a woman wert thou first created,
And for my sake euen so doth she abuse me,
And for my selfe mine owne worth do define,
And for that ritches where is my deseruing?
And for that sorrow, which I then didde feele,
And for the peace of you I hold such strife,
And for they look’d but with deuining eyes,
And for this sinne there is no remedie,
And fortifie your selfe in your decay
And found it in thy cheeke: he can affoord
And found such faire assistance in my verse,
And frantick madde with euer-more vnrest,
And from the for-lorne world his visage hide
And gaine by ills thrise more then I haue spent.
And gainst my selfe a lawfull plea commence,
And gilded honor shamefully misplast,
And giuen grace a double Maiestie.
And giuen to time your owne deare purchas’d right,
And giues thy pen both skill and argument.
And grew a seething bath which yet men proue,
And hang more praise vpon deceased I,
And haplie of our old acquaintance tell.
And hauing climb’d the steepe vp heauenly hill,
And hauing thee, of all mens pride I boast.
And heauie ignorance aloft to flie,
And heauily from woe to woe tell ore
And her Quietus is to render thee.
And he that calls on thee, let him bring forth
And him as for a map doth Nature store,
And his loue-kindling fire did quickly steepe
And husband natures ritches from expence,
And in aboundance addeth to his store,
And in fresh numbers number all your graces,
And in his thoughts of loue doth share a part.
And in mine owne loues strength seeme to decay,
And in my madnesse might speake ill of thee,
And in my will no faire acceptance shine:
And in our faults by lyes we flattered be.
And in some perfumes is there more delight,
And in them-selues their pride lies buried,
And in the praise thereof spends all his might,
And in this change is my inuention spent,
And keepe inuention in a noted weed,
And keepe my drooping eye-lids open wide,
And kept vnvsde the vser so destroyes it:
And lace it selfe with his societie?
And let that pine to aggrauat thy store;
And life no longer then thy loue will stay,
And like enough thou knowst thy estimate,
And like vnlettered clarke still crie Amen,
And liue no more to shame nor me, nor you.
And loathsome canker liues in sweetest bud.
And looke vpon my selfe and curse my fate.
And loosing her, my friend hath found that losse,
And made my selfe a motley to the view,
And maiden vertue rudely strumpeted,
And make me trauaile forth without my cloake,
And make the earth deuoure her owne sweet brood,
And make times spoiles dispised euery where.
And many maiden gardens yet vnset,
And mocke you with me after I am gon.
And mone th’expence of many a vannisht sight.
And more, much more then in my verse can sit,
And my great minde most kingly drinkes it vp,
And my hearts right, their inward loue of heart.
And my next selfe thou harder hast ingrossed,
And my sick Muse doth giue an other place.
And needie Nothing trimd in iollitie,
And night doth nightly make greefes length seeme |(stronger
And nights bright daies when dreams do shew thee me,
And nothing gainst Times sieth can make defence
And nothing stands but for his sieth to mow.
And often is his gold complexion dimm’d,
And of this booke, this learning maist thou taste.
And on iust proofe surmise, accumilate,
And only herauld to the gaudy spring,
And other straines of woe, which now seeme woe,
And our deare loue loose name of single one,
And patience tame, to sufferance bide each check,
And peace proclaimes Oliues of endlesse age,
And perspectiue it is best Painters art.
And place my merrit in the eie of skorne,
And play the mothers part kisse me, be kind.
And precious phrase by all the Muses fil’d.
And proud of many, liues vpon his gaines?
And proue thee virtuous, though thou art forsworne:
And purest faith vnhappily forsworne,
And puts apparrell on my tottered louing,
And rather make them borne to our desire,
And right perfection wrongfully disgrac’d,
And ruin’d loue when it is built anew
And sable curls or siluer’d ore with white:
And sau’d my life saying not you.
And sayes in him their faire appearance lyes.
And scarcely greete me with that sunne thine eye,
And seald false bonds of loue as oft as mine,
And see the braue day sunck in hidious night,
And see thy blood warme when thou feel’st it could.
And shalt by fortune once more re-suruay:
And sicke of wel-fare found a kind of meetnesse,
And simple-Truth miscalde Simplicitie,
And situation with those dancing chips,
And so my pattent back againe is sweruing.
And so of you, beautious and louely youth,
And soone to you, as you to me then tendred
And so should you, to loue things nothing worth.
And so the Generall of hot desire,
And steale dead seeing of his liuing hew?
And stops his pipe in growth of riper daies:
And strength by limping sway disabled,
And stretched miter of an Antique song.
And such a counter-part shall fame his wit,
And sue a friend, came debter for my sake,
And sute thy pitty like in euery part.
And sweets growne common loose their deare delight.
And swere that brightnesse doth not grace the day?
And take thou my oblacion, poore but free,
And tender chorle makst wast in niggarding:
And that fresh bloud which yongly thou bestow’st,
And that in guesse they measure by thy deeds,
And that is this, and this with thee remaines.
And that thou teachest how to make one twaine,
And that vnfaire which fairely doth excell:
And that which gouernes me to goe about,
And that your loue taught it this Alcumie?
And the firme soile win of the watry maine,
And their grosse painting might be better vs’d,
And the iust pleasure lost, which is so deemed,
And then beleeue me, my loue is as faire,
And thence this slaunder as I thinke proceeds.
And then thou louest me for my name is Will.
And therefore art inforc’d to seeke anew,
And therefore from my face she turnes my foes,
And therefore haue I slept in your report,
And therefore maiest without attaint ore-looke
And therefore to your faire no painting set,
And there raignes Loue and all Loues louing parts,
And the sad Augurs mock their owne presage,
And thether hied a sad distemperd guest.
And they are ritch, and ransome all ill deeds.
And they shall liue, and he in them still greene.
And this my hand, against my selfe vpreare,
And thou (all they) hast all the all of me.
And thou away, the very birds are mute.
And though they be out-stript by euery pen,
And thou in this shalt finde thy monument,
And thou present’st a pure vnstayned prime.
And thou shalt finde merrits not reproouing,
And threescoore yeare would make the world away:
And time that gaue, doth now his gift confound.
And to be praisd of ages yet to be.
And to be sure that is not false I sweare
And to his pallat doth prepare the cup.
And to his robbry had annext thy breath,
And to inlighten thee gaue eyes to blindnesse,
And to the most of praise adde some-thing more,
And to the painted banquet bids my heart:
And to this false plague are they now transferred.
And tought it thus a new to greete:
And toungs to be, your beeing shall rehearse,
And trouble deafe heauen with my bootlesse cries,
And truly not the morning Sun of Heauen
And vnder thee their poesie disperse.
And weepe a fresh loues long since canceld woe,
And were their braue state out of memory.
And what is’t but mine owne when I praise thee,
And when a woman woes, what womans sonne,
And wherefore say not I that I am old?
And whether that my angel be turn’d fiend,
And will thy soule knowes is admitted there,
And with his presence grace impietie,
And with old woes new waile my deare times waste:
And worse essaies prou’d thee my best of loue,
And would corrupt my saint to be a diuel:
And yet by heauen I thinke my loue as rare,
And yet it may be said I lou’d her deerely,
And yet loue knowes it is a greater griefe
And yet me thinkes I haue Astronomy,
And yet this time remou’d was sommers time,
And yet thou wilt, for I being pent in thee,
And yet to times in hope, my verse shall stand
And you and loue are still my argument:
And you but one, can euery shaddow lend:
And you in Grecian tires are painted new:
And you in euery blessed shape we know.
And you must liue drawne by your owne sweet skill.
And your sweet semblance to some other giue.
And your true rights be termd a Poets rage,
An eye more bright then theirs, lesse false in rowling:
Angry that his prescridiv.1.titleons are not kept
Anon permit the basest cloudes to ride,
An other time mine eye is my hearts guest,
Applying feares to hopes, and hopes to feares,
A quest of thoughts, all tennants to the heart,
Are both with thee, where euer I abide,
Are vanishing, or vanisht out of sight,
Are windowes to my brest, where-through the Sun
Art left the prey of euery vulgar theefe.
As I all other in all worths surmount.
As I by yours, y’haue past a hell of Time,
As I not for my selfe, but for thee will,
As Philomell in summers front doth singe,
As a decrepit father takes delight,
37: As a decrepit father takes delight
As after Sun-set fadeth in the West,
23: As an vnperfect actor on the stage
As an vnperfect actor on the stage,
As any mothers childe, though not so bright
As any she beli’d with false compare.
As cal it Winter, which being ful of care,
Asconce and strangely: But by all aboue,
As easie might I from my selfe depart,
As euery Alien pen hath got my vse,
As fast as obiects to his beames assemble:
11: As fast as thou shalt wane so fast thou grow’st
As fast as thou shalt wane so fast thou grow’st,
As from my soule which in thy brest doth lye:
As he takes from you, I ingraft you new.
As high as learning, my rude ignorance.
As his triumphant prize, proud of this pride,
As if by some instinct the wretch did know
As ile my selfe disgrace, knowing thy wil,
As interest of the dead, which now appeare,
As on the finger of a throned Queene,
As soone as thinke the place where he would be.
As subiect to times loue, or to times hate,
As tender nurse her babe from faring ill,
As testie sick-men when their deaths be neere,
As the death bed, whereon it must expire,
As the perfumed tincture of the Roses,
As those gould candells fixt in heauens ayer:
As those two morning eyes become thy face:
As those whose beauties proudly make them cruell,
As thou being mine, mine is thy good report.
As thou being mine, mine is thy good report.
As thou goest onwards still will plucke thee backe,
As thus, mine eyes due is their outward part,
As to behold desert a begger borne,
As to preuent our malladies vnseene,
As truth and beautie shal together thriue
As twixt a miser and his wealth is found.
As victors of my silence cannot boast,
As with your shaddow I with these did play.
At first the very worst of fortunes might.
A third nor red, nor white, had stolne of both,
A thousand grones but thinking on thy face,
At my abuses, reckon vp their owne,
A torment thrice three-fold thus to be crossed:
At randon from the truth vainely exprest.
At such who not borne faire no beauty lack,
Attending on his goulden pilgrimage:
At the woods bouldnes by thee blushing stand.
Authorizing thy trespas with compare,
A vengfull canker eate him vp to death.
Awakes my heart, to hearts and eyes delight.
20: A womans face with natures owne hand painted
A womans face with natures owne hand painted,
A womans gentle hart but not acquainted
Aye me, but yet thou mightst my feate forbeare,
Bare ruin’d quiers, where late the sweet birds sang.
Be absent from thy walkes and in my tongue,
Be anchord in the baye where all men ride,
Beare thine eyes straight, though thy proud heart goe |(wide.
Bearing the wanton burthen of the prime,
Bearing thy heart which I will keep so chary
Be as thy presence is gracious and kind,
Beated and chopt with tand antiquitie,
Beautie no pensell, beauties truth to lay:
Beauties effect with beauty were bereft,
Beautious thou art, therefore to be assailed.
Beauty ore-snow’d and barenes euery where,
Because I would not dull you with my songe.
Because he needs no praise, wilt thou be dumb?
Before a ioy proposd behind a dreame,
Before the goulden tresses of the dead,
Before these bastard signes of faire were borne,
Beggerd of blood to blush through liuely vaines,
Being fond on praise, which makes your praises worse.
Being had to tryumph, being lackt to hope.
57: Being your slaue what should I doe but tend
Being your slaue what should I doe but tend,
Being your vassail bound to staie your leisure.
Be it lawfull I loue thee as thou lou’st those,
Be not selfe-wild for thou art much too faire,
Be scorn’d, like old men of lesse truth then tongue,
Beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groane
133: Beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groane
Be thou the tenth Muse, ten times more in worth
Better becomes the gray cheeks of th’ East,
47: Betwixt mine eye and heart a league is tooke
Betwixt mine eye and heart a league is tooke,
Be where you list, your charter is so strong,
140: Be wise as thou art cruell, do not presse
Be wise as thou art cruell, do not presse
Beyond all date, euen to eternity.
Blessed are you whose worthinesse giues skope,
Booke both my wilfulnesse and errors downe,
Borne on the beare with white and bristly beard:
Both finde each other, and I loose both twaine,
Both grace and faults are lou’d of more and lesse:
Both truth and beauty on my loue depends:
Bound for the prize of (all to precious) you,
Bring me within the leuel of your frowne,
But I forbid thee one most hainous crime,
But ah, thought kills me that I am not thought
But all alone stands hugely pollitick,
But as the Marygold at the suns eye,
But as the riper should by time decease,
But at my mistres eie loues brand new fired,
But beares it out euen to the edge of doome:
But beauties waste hath in the world an end,
74: But be contented when that fell arest
But be contented when that fell arest,
But being both from me both to each friend,
But best is best, if neuer intermixt.
But day by night and night by day oprest.
But day doth daily draw my sorrowes longer,
But doe not so, I loue thee in such sort,
But doe not so, I loue thee in such sort,
92: But doe thy worst to steale thy selfe away
But doe thy worst to steale thy selfe away,
But flowers distil’d though they with winter meete,
But for his theft in pride of all his growth
But for their virtue only is their show,
But found no cure, the bath for my helpe lies,
But from thine eies my knowledge I deriue,
But heauen in thy creation did decree,
But heauie teares, badges of eithers woe.
But here’s the ioy, my friend and I are one,
But he that writes of you, if he can tell,
But hope of Orphans, and vn-fathered fruite,
But if that flowre with base infection meete,
But if the while I thinke on thee (deare friend)
But if thou catch thy hope turne back to me:
But if thou liue remembred not to be,
But in the onset come, so shall I taste
But is prophan’d, if not liues in disgrace.
But let your loue euen with my life decay.
But like a sad slaue stay and thinke of nought
But loue, for loue, thus shall excuse my iade,
But loue hate on for now I know thy minde,
But makes antiquitie for aye his page,
But mutuall render, onely me for thee.
But my fiue wits, nor my fiue sences can
But no such Roses see I in her cheekes,
But not to tell of good, or euil lucke,
But now is blacke beauties successiue heire,
But now my gracious numbers are decayde,
But out alack, he was but one houre mine,
But reckening time, whose milliond accidents
But rysing at thy name doth point out thee,
But sad mortallity ore-swaies their power,
But shoote not at me in your wakened hate:
But since he died and Poets better proue,
But since she prickt thee out for womens pleasure,
But since your worth (wide as the Ocean is)
But slaue to slauery my sweet’st friend must be.
But sweet, or culler it had stolne from thee.
But that I hope some good conceipt of thine
But that is in my thought, whose loue to you
But that so much of earth and water wrought,
But that thou none lou’st is most euident:
But that wild musick burthens euery bow,
But that your trespasse now becomes a fee,
But the defendant doth that plea deny,
But then begins a iourny in my head
But thence I learne and find the lesson true,
But then my friends heart let my poore heart bale,
But these perticulers are not my measure,
But things remou’d that hidden in there lie.
But those same toungs that giue thee so thine owne,
But thou art all my art, and doost aduance
But thou art twice forsworne to me loue swearing,
But thou contracted to thine owne bright eyes,
But thou, to whom my iewels trifles are,
But thou wilt not, nor he will not be free,
But thy eternall Sommer shall not fade,
But ’tis my heart what loues what they dispise,
But weepe to haue, that which it feares to loose.
But were some childe of yours aliue that time,
But whats so blessed faire that feares no blot,
But when I sleepe, in dreames they looke on thee,
But when from high-most pich with wery car,
But when in thee times forrowes I behould,
But when my glasse shewes me my selfe indeed
But when she saw my wofull state,
But when your countinance fild vp his line,
But wherefore do not you a mightier waie
16: But wherefore do not you a mightier waie
But wherefore sayes she not she is vniust?
But why of two othes breach doe I accuse thee,
But why thy odor matcheth not thy show,
But yet be blam’d, if thou this selfe deceauest
But you like none, none you for constant heart.
But you shall shine more bright in these contents
Buy tearmes diuine in selling houres of drosse:
By adding one thing to my purpose nothing.
By chance, or natures changing course vntrim’d:
By childrens eyes, her husbands shape in minde:
By looking on thee in the liuing day?
By new vnfoulding his imprison’d pride.
By oft predict that I in heauen finde.
By praising him here who doth hence remaine.
By seeing farther then the eye hath showne.
By selfe example mai’st thou be denide.
By that sweet ornament which truth doth giue,
By their rancke thoughtes, my deedes must not be shown
By those swift messengers return’d from thee,
By vnions married do offend thine eare,
By wilfull taste of what thy selfe refusest.
Calls backe the louely Aprill of her prime,
Came there for cure and this by that I proue,
Came tripping by, but in her maiden hand,
Can bring him to his sweet vp-locked treasure,
Can make you liue your selfe in eies of men,
Cannot dispraise, but in a kinde of praise,
Canst thou O cruell, say I loue thee not,
149: Canst thou O cruell, say I loue thee not
Can yet the lease of my true loue controule,
Cauld to that audite by aduis’d respects,
Cheared and checkt euen by the selfe-same skie:
Chiding that tongue that euer sweet,
Cloudes and eclipses staine both Moone and Sunne,
Come daily to the banckes, that when they see:
Come in the rereward of a conquerd woe,
Comes home againe, on better iudgement making.
Commanded by the motion of thine eyes.
Commit to these waste blacks, and thou shalt finde
Compar’d with losse of thee, will not seeme so.
Compare them with the bett’ring of the time,
Consum’d with that which it was nurrisht by.
Could make me any summers story tell:
Counting no old thing old, thou mine, I thine,
Crawles to maturity, wherewith being crown’d,
Creating euery bad a perfect best
Creepe in twixt vowes, and change decrees of Kings,
Cries to catch her whose busie care is bent,
Crooked eclipses gainst his glory fight,
Crowning the present, doubting of the rest:
153: Cupid laid by his brand and fell a sleepe
Cupid laid by his brand and fell a sleepe,
Currall is farre more red, then her lips red,
Darkning thy powre to lend base subiects light.
Deare heart forbeare to glance thine eye aside,
Deaths second selfe that seals vp all in rest.
Delights to peepe, to gaze therein on thee
Describe Adonis and the counterfet,
Deserues the trauaile of a worthier pen,
Desire is death, which Phisick did except.
Desiring this mans art, and that mans skope,
Deuouring time blunt thou the Lyons pawes,
19: Deuouring time blunt thou the Lyons pawes
Die single and thine Image dies with thee.
Die to themselues. Sweet Roses doe not so,
Disdaines the tillage of thy husbandry?
Dispight of wrinkles this thy goulden time.
Distil’d from Lymbecks foule as hell within,
Diswade one foolish heart from seruing thee,
Diuert strong mindes to th’ course of altring things:
DjVu Editions E-books
Do I enuie those Iackes that nimble leape,
Doe I not thinke on thee when I forgot
Doe in consent shake hands to torture me,
Doest hould times fickle glasse, his fickle, hower:
Doing thee vantage, duble vantage me.
Do not so much as my poore name reherse;
Dost thou desire my slumbers should be broken,
Dost thou vpon thy fading mansion spend?
Doth follow night who like a fiend
Doth halfe that glory to the sober West
Doth homage to his new appearing sight,
Doth part his function, and is partly blind,
Doth spot the beautie of thy budding name?
Doth teach that ease and that repose to say
Doubting the filching age will steale his treasure,
Drawne after you, you patterne of all those.
114: Drinke vp the monarks plague this flattery?
Drinke vp the monarks plague this flattery?
Drugs poyson him that so fell sicke of you.
Dulling my lines, and doing me disgrace.
Duty so great, which wit so poore as mine
Each changing place with that which goes before,
Each trifle vnder truest barres to thrust,
Eate vp thy charge? is this thy bodies end?
Either not assayld, or victor beeing charg’d,
Ere beauties dead fleece made another gay:
Ere you were borne was beauties summer dead.
Eternal numbers to out-liue long date.
Euen as when first I hallowed thy faire name.
Euen for this, let vs deuided liue,
Euen in the eyes of all posterity
Euen of fiue hundreth courses of the Sunne,
Euen so being full of your nere cloying sweetnesse,
Euen so my Sunne one early morne did shine,
Euen such a beauty as you maister now.
Euen that your pittie is enough to cure mee.
Euen those that said I could not loue you deerer,
Euen to thy pure and most most louing brest.
Exceeded by the hight of happier men.
Excuse not silence so, for’t lies in thee,
Excusing their sins more then their sins are:
Faire, kinde, and true, haue often liu’d alone.
Faire, kinde, and true, is all my argument,
Faire, kinde and true, varrying to other words,
Fairing the foule with Arts faulse borrow’d face,
87: Farewell thou art too deare for my possessing
Farewell thou art too deare for my possessing,
Featur’d like him, like him with friends possest,
Feedes on the rarities of natures truth,
Feeding on that which doth preserue the ill,
Feed’st thy lights flame with selfe substantiall fewell,
Finding the first conceit of loue there bred,
Finding thy worth a limmit past my praise,
Find no determination, then you were
Flatter the mountaine tops with soueraine eie,
For Canker vice the sweetest buds doth loue,
For I am shamd by that which I bring forth,
For I haue sworne deepe othes of thy deepe kindnesse:
For I haue sworne thee faire, and thought thee bright,
For I haue sworne thee faire: more periurde eye,
For I impaire not beautie being mute,
For I must nere loue him whom thou dost hate.
For Sommer and his pleasures waite on thee,
For all my vowes are othes but to misuse thee:
For all that beauty that doth couer thee,
For all the day they view things vnrespected,
For as the Sun is daily new and old,
For as you were when first your eye I eyde,
For at a frowne they in their glory die.
For beauties patterne to succeding men.
For bending all my louing thoughts on thee,
For blunting the fine point of seldome pleasure.
For compound sweet; Forgoing simple sauor,
For euery vulgar paper to rehearse:
For feare of which, heare this thou age vnbred,
Forgot vpon your dearest loue to call,
For hauing traffike with thy selfe alone,
For how do I hold thee but by thy granting,
For if I should dispaire I should grow madde,
For if it see the rud’st or gentlest sight,
For if you were by my vnkindnesse shaken
For it depends vpon that loue of thine.
For it no forme deliuers to the heart
For men diseasd, but I my Mistrisse thrall,
For neuer resting time leads Summer on,
For nimble thought can iumpe both sea and land,
For no man well of such a salue can speake,
For nothing hold me, so it please thee hold,
For nothing this wide Vniuerse I call,
For precious friends hid in deaths dateles night,
10: For shame deny that thou bear’st loue to any
For shame deny that thou bear’st loue to any
For she hath no exchecker now but his,
For since each hand hath put on Natures power,
For slanders marke was euer yet the faire,
For still temptation followes where thou art.
For such a time do I now fortifie
For sweetest things turne sowrest by their deedes,
For tearme of life thou art assured mine,
For that deepe wound it giues my friend and me;
For that same grone doth put this in my mind,
For that sweet odor, which doth in it liue:
For that which longer nurseth the disease.
For thee, against my selfe ile vow debate,
For thee, and for my selfe, noe quiet finde.
For thee watch I, whilst thou dost wake elsewhere,
For their can liue no hatred in thine eye,
For then dispight of space I would be brought,
For then my thoughts (from far where I abide)
For they in thee a thousand errors note,
For thou art couetous, and he is kinde,
For thou art so possest with murdrous hate,
For thou betraying me, I doe betray
For thou nor farther then my thoughts canst moue,
For through the Painter must you see his skill,
For thy neglect of truth in beauty di’d?
For thy records, and what we see doth lye,
For thy sweet loue remembred such welth brings,
For to no other passe my verses tend,
For to thy sensuall fault I bring in sence,
For truth prooues theeuish for a prize so deare.
For well thou know’st to my deare doting hart
For we which now behold these present dayes,
For what care I who calles me well or ill,
For when these quicker Elements are gone
For where is she so faire whose vn-eard wombe
For whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or wit,
For who’s so dumbe that cannot write to thee,
For why should others false adulterat eyes
For you in me can nothing worthy proue.
1: From fairest creatures we desire increase
From fairest creatures we desire increase,
From hands of falsehood, in sure wards of trust?
From heauen to hell is flowne away.
From hence your memory death cannot take,
From his low tract and looke an other way:
From limits farre remote, where thou doost stay,
From me farre of, with others all to neere.
From sullen earth sings himns at Heauens gate,
From thee, the pleasure of the fleeting yeare?
From this vile world with vildest wormes to dwell:
From thy behauiour, beautie doth he giue
From whence at pleasure thou maist come and part,
From where thou art, why should I hast me thence,
98: From you haue I beene absent in the spring
From you haue I beene absent in the spring,
Full characterd with lasting memory,
33: Full many a glorious morning haue I seene
Full many a glorious morning haue I seene,
Gainst death, and all obliuious emnity
Gentle thou art, and therefore to be wonne,
Gilding the obiect where-vpon it gazeth,
Giue my loue fame faster then time wasts life,
Giue not a windy night a rainie morrow,
Giue saluation to my sportiue blood?
Giue them their fingers, me thy lips to kisse.
Giue warning to the world that I am fled
Giuing him ayde, my verse astonished.
Gor’d mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most deare,
Graunt if thou wilt, thou art belou’d of many,
Great Princes fauorites their faire leaues spread,
Growes fairer then at first, more strong, far greater.
Growing a bath and healthfull remedy,
Guilding pale streames with heauenly alcumy:
Had, hauing, and in quest, to haue extreame,
Had my friends Muse growne with this growing age,
Hang on such thornes, and play as wantonly,
Haplye I thinke on thee, and then my state,
Happy to haue thy loue, happy to die
Harsh, featurelesse, and rude, barrenly perrish,
Haste thou the Master Mistris of my passion,
Hate of my sinne, grounded on sinfull louing,
Hath beene before, how are our braines beguild,
Hath deare religious loue stolne from mine eye,
Hath left me, and I desperate now approoue.
Hath motion, and mine eye may be deceaued.
Hath put a spirit of youth in euery thing:
Hath trauaild on to Ages steepie night,
Haue I not seene dwellers on forme and fauor
Haue added fethers to the learneds wing,
Haue eyes to wonder, but lack toungs to praise.
Haue facultie by nature to subsist,
Haue from the forrests shooke three summers pride,
Haue put on black, and louing mourners bee,
Hearing you praisd, I say ’tis so, ’tis true,
He is contented thy poore drudge to be
He learnd but suretie-like to write for me,
He lends thee vertue, and he stole that word,
Hence, thou subbornd Informer, a trew soule
He nor that affable familiar ghost
He of tall building, and of goodly pride.
He paies the whole, and yet am I not free.
Her Audite (though delayd) answer’d must be,
Herein liues wisdome, beauty, and increase,
Her eyes so suted, and they mourners seeme,
Her loue, for whose deare loue I rise and fall.
He robs thee of, and payes it thee againe,
Her prettie lookes haue beene mine enemies,
Hers by thy beauty temdiv.1.titleng her to thee,
Hiding thy brau’ry in their rotten smoke.
Him haue I lost, thou hast both him and me,
Him in thy course vntainted doe allow,
His beautie shall in these blacke lines be seene,
His rider lou’d not speed being made from thee:
His tender heire might beare his memory:
Holds in perfection but a little moment.
How can I then be elder then thou art?
28: How can I then returne in happy plight
How can I then returne in happy plight
How can it? O how can loues eye be true,
How can my Muse want subiect to inuent
38: How can my Muse want subiect to inuent
How carefull was I when I tooke my way,
48: How carefull was I when I tooke my way
How far I toyle, still farther off from thee.
How farre a moderne quill doth come to short,
How haue mine eies out of their Spheares bene fitted
50: How heauie doe I iourney on the way
How heauie doe I iourney on the way,
How like Eaues apple doth thy beauty grow,
97: How like a Winter hath my absence beene
How like a Winter hath my absence beene
How many Lambs might the sterne Wolfe betray,
How many a holy and obsequious teare
How many gazers mightst thou lead away,
How much more praise deseru’d thy beauties vse,
How oft when thou my musike musike playst,
128: How oft when thou my musike musike playst
95: How sweet and louely dost thou make the shame
How sweet and louely dost thou make the shame,
How to deuide the conquest of thy sight,
How with this rage shall beautie hold a plea,
How would (I say) mine eyes be blessed made,
How would thy shadowes forme, forme happy show,
Hung with the trophies of my louers gon,
I all alone beweepe my out-cast state,
I am to waite, though waiting so be hell,
I cannot blame thee, for my loue thou vsest,
I do beleeue her though I know she lyes,
I doe forgiue thy robb’rie gentle theefe
If I could write the beauty of your eyes,
If I loose thee, my losse is my loues gaine,
If I might teach thee witte better it weare,
If Nature (soueraine misteres ouer wrack)
If all were minded so, the times should cease,
If any, be a Satire to decay,
If eyes corrupt by ouer-partiall lookes,
If from thy selfe, to store thou wouldst conuert:
If haires be wiers, black wiers grow on her head:
I fill it full with wils, and my will one,
If it be not, then loue doth well denote,
If it be poison’d, tis the lesser sinne,
If it were fild with your most high deserts?
If like a Lambe he could his lookes translate.
If my slight Muse doe please these curious daies,
If not from my loues breath, the purple pride,
I found (or thought I found) you did exceed,
If snow be white, why then her breasts are dun:
If some suspect of ill maskt not thy show,
If ten of thine ten times refigur’d thee,
If that be faire whereon my false eyes dote,
If the dull substance of my flesh were thought,
44: If the dull substance of my flesh were thought
If their bee nothing new, but that which is,
59: If their bee nothing new, but that which is
If the true concord of well tuned sounds,
If thinking on me then should make you woe.
If this be error and vpon me proued,
If thou couldst answere this faire child of mine
If thou doost seeke to haue what thou doost hide,
32: If thou suruiue my well contented daie
If thou suruiue my well contented daie,
If thou turne back and my loude crying still.
If thou wilt leaue me, do not leaue me last,
If thou wouldst vse the strength of all thy state?
If thy soule check thee that I come so neere,
136: If thy soule check thee that I come so neere
If thy sweet vertue answere not thy show.
If thy vnworthinesse raisd loue in me,
If time haue any wrincle grauen there,
I gesse one angel in an others hel.
I grant (sweet loue) thy louely argument
I grant thou wert not married to my Muse,
82: I grant thou wert not married to my Muse
I graunt I neuer saw a goddesse goe,
I hate, from hate away she threw,
I hate she alterd with an end,
I haue no precious time at al to spend;
I haue seene Roses damaskt, red and white,
I loue not lesse, thogh lesse the show appeare,
I loue to heare her speake, yet well I know,
I make my loue ingrafted to this store:
I may be straight though they them-selues be beuel
I may not euer-more acknowledge thee,
I must attend, times leasure with my mone.
I must each day say ore the very same,
In a could vallie-fountaine of that ground:
In act thy bed-vow broake and new faith torne,
In all externall grace you haue some part,
Incapable of more repleat, with you,
Incertenties now crowne them-selues assur’de,
Increasing store with losse, and losse with store.
In daies long since, before these last so bad.
I neuer saw that you did painting need,
83: I neuer saw that you did painting need
I neuer writ, nor no man euer loued.
141: In faith I doe not loue thee with mine eyes
In faith I doe not loue thee with mine eyes,
In gentle numbers time so idely spent,
In him those holy antique howers are seene,
Inioyd no sooner but dispised straight,
Iniurious distance should not stop my way,
In louing thee thou know’st I am forsworne,
152: In louing thee thou know’st I am forsworne
In manies lookes, the falce hearts history
In me thou seest the glowing of such fire,
In me thou seest the twi-light of such day,
In my loues veines thou hast too grosely died,
In nothing art thou blacke saue in thy deeds,
In one of thine, from that which thou departest,
In other accents doe this praise confound
In others workes thou doost but mend the stile,
In our two loues there is but one respect,
In polisht forme of well refined pen.
In praise of Ladies dead, and louely Knights,
In processe of the seasons haue I seene,
In pursuit of the thing she would haue stay:
In sequent toile all forwards do contend.
In singlenesse the parts that thou should’st beare:
In sleepe a King, but waking no such matter.
In so profound Abisme I throw all care
Intend a zelous pilgrimage to thee,
In tender Embassie of loue to thee,
In the distraction of this madding feuer?
In thee thy summer ere thou be distil’d:
In the ould age blacke was not counted faire,
127: In the ould age blacke was not counted faire
In things of great receit with ease we prooue.
In things right true my heart and eyes haue erred,
In thy soules thought (all naked) will bestow it:
Intitled in their parts, do crowned sit,
In true plaine words, by thy true telling friend.
In vowing new hate after new loue bearing:
In whose confine immured is the store,
In winged speed no motion shall I know,
Ioyne with the spight of fortune, make me bow.
Is but the seemely rayment of my heart,
I see, a better state to me belongs
I see discridiv.1.titleons of the fairest wights,
I see their antique Pen would haue exprest,
I send them back againe and straight grow sad.
Is from the booke of honour rased quite,
I should in thought controule your times of pleasure,
I sick withall the helpe of bath desired,
I sigh the lacke of many a thing I sought,
9: Is it for feare to wet a widdowes eye
Is it for feare to wet a widdowes eye,
Is it thy spirit that thou send’st from thee
61: Is it thy wil, thy Image should keepe open
Is it thy wil, thy Image should keepe open
Is lust in action, and till action, lust
Is more then my ore-prest defence can bide?
I sommon vp remembrance of things past,
Is periurd, murdrous, blouddy full of blame,
Is poorely immitated after you,
I’st not ynough to torture me alone,
Is writ in moods and frounes and wrinckles strange.
I tell the Day to please him thou art bright,
It feares not policy that Heriticke,
I thinke good thoughts, whilst other write good wordes,
It is my loue that keepes mine eie awake,
It is so grounded inward in my heart.
It is the star to euery wandring barke,
It might for fortunes basterd be vnfathered,
It suffers not in smilinge pomp, nor falls
Iust to the time, not with the time exchang’d,
I was not sick of any feare from thence.
I will acquaintance strangle and looke strange:
I will be true dispight thy syeth and thee.
I will not prayse that purpose not to sell.
Kill me out-right with lookes, and rid my paine.
Kill me with spights yet we must not be foes.
Kinde is my loue to day, to morrow kinde,
Kissing with golden face the meddowes greene;
Knowing a better spirit doth vse your name,
Knowing thy heart torment me with disdaine,
Laid by his side his heart inflaming brand,
Lasciuious grace, in whom all il wel showes,
Leane penurie within that Pen doth dwell,
Least I (too much proface) should do it wronge:
Least eyes well seeing thy foule faults should finde.
Least guilty of my faults thy sweet selfe proue.
Least my bewailed guilt should do thee shame,
Least sorrow lend me words and words expresse,
Least the wise world should looke into your mone,
Leauing thee liuing in posterity?
Leese but their show, their substance still liues sweet.
Let him but coppy what in you is writ,
36: Let me confesse that we two must be twaine
Let me confesse that we two must be twaine,
Let me excuse thee, ah my loue well knowes,
Let me not to the marriage of true mindes
116: Let me not to the marriage of true mindes
105: Let not my loue be cal’d Idolatrie
Let not my loue be cal’d Idolatrie,
Let no vnkinde, no faire beseechers kill,
Let them say more that like of heare-say well,
Let this sad Intrim like the Ocean be
Let those who are in fauor with their stars,
25: Let those who are in fauor with their stars
Let those whom nature hath not made for store,
Lifts vp his burning head, each vnder eye
Like a deceiued husband, so loues face,
Like as the waues make towards the pibled shore,
60: Like as the waues make towards the pibled shore
118: Like as to make our appetites more keene
Like as to make our appetites more keene
Like feeble age he reeleth from the day,
Like him that trauels I returne againe,
Like stones of worth they thinly placed are,
(Like to the Larke at breake of daye arising)
Like widdowed wombes after their Lords decease:
Lillies that fester, smell far worse then weeds.
Loe as a carefull huswife runnes to catch,
143: Loe as a carefull huswife runnes to catch
Loe in the Orient when the gracious light,
7: Loe in the Orient when the gracious light
Loe thus by day my lims, by night my mind,
3: Looke in thy glasse and tell the face thou vewest
Looke in thy glasse and tell the face thou vewest,
Looke in your glasse and there appeares a face,
Looke what an vnthrift in the world doth spend
Looke what is best, that best I wish in thee,
Looke what thy memorie cannot containe,
Looke whom she best indow’d, she gaue the more;
Looking on darknes which the blind doe see.
Looking with pretty ruth vpon my paine.
26: Lord of my loue, to whome in vassalage
Lord of my loue, to whome in vassalage
Lose all, and more by paying too much rent
Loue alters not with his breefe houres and weekes,
Loue is a Babe, then might I not say so
142: Loue is my sinne, and thy deare vertue hate
Loue is my sinne, and thy deare vertue hate,
Loue is too young to know what conscience is,
151: Loue is too young to know what conscience is
Loues eye is not so true as all mens: no,
Loues fire heates water, water cooles not loue.
Louing offendors thus I will excuse yee,
Lou’s not Times foole, though rosie lips and cheeks
Madde slanderers by madde eares beleeued be.
Made in pursut and in possession so,
Made more or les by thy continuall hast:
Made old offences of affections new.
Make answere Muse, wilt thou not haply saie,
Make but my name thy loue, and loue that still,
Make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleet’st,
Makes So[m]mers welcome, thrice more wish’d, more rare:
Makes blacke night beautious, and her old face new.
Make sweet some viall; treasure thou some place,
Make thee an other selfe for loue of me,
Make warre vppon this bloudie tirant time?
Making a coopelment of proud compare
Making a famine where aboundance lies,
Making dead wood more blest then liuing lips,
Making his stile admired euery where.
(Making lasciuious comments on thy sport)
Making no summer of an others greene,
Making their tombe the wombe wherein they grew?
Marke how one string sweet husband to an other,
Marke how with my neglect I doe dispence.
May make seeme bare, in wanting words to shew it;
May still seeme loue to me, though alter’d new:
May time disgrace, and wretched mynuit kill.
Me for my dombe thoughts, speaking in effect.
Me from my selfe thy cruell eye hath taken,
Me thinkes no face so gratious is as mine,
Might I not then say now I loue you best,
Mine appetite I neuer more will grin’de
Mine be thy loue and thy loues vse their treasure.
Mine eie well knowes what with his gust is greeing,
Mine eye and heart are at a mortall warre,
46: Mine eye and heart are at a mortall warre
Mine eye hath play’d the painter and hath steeld,
24: Mine eye hath play’d the painter and hath steeld
Mine eye, my heart their pictures sight would barre,
Mine eyes haue drawne thy shape, and thine for me
Mine owne selfe loue quite contrary I read
Mine owne true loue that doth my rest defeat,
Mine ransoms yours, and yours must ransome mee.
More flowers I noted, yet none could see,
More sharpe to me then spurring to his side,
More then enough am I that vexe thee still,
More then that tonge that more hath more exprest.
More worthy I to be belou’d of thee.
Most true it is, that I haue lookt on truth
Most worthy comfort, now my greatest griefe,
Much liker then your painted counterfeit:
Musick to heare, why hear’st thou musick sadly,
8: Musick to heare, why hear’st thou musick sadly
My Mistres eyes are nothing like the Sunne,
130: My Mistres eyes are nothing like the Sunne
My Mistres when shee walkes treads on the ground,
My body is the frame wherein ti’s held,
My bonds in thee are all determinate.
My deepest sence, how hard true sorrow hits,
My glasse shall not perswade me I am ould,
22: My glasse shall not perswade me I am ould
My greefe lies onward and my ioy behind.
My heart doth plead that thou in him doost lye,
My heart, mine eye the freedome of that right,
My heauy eielids to the weary night?
My life being made of foure, with two alone,
My life hath in this line some interest,
147: My loue is as a feauer longing still
My loue is as a feauer longing still,
My loue is strengthned though more weake in see-|(ming
My loue lookes fresh, and death to me subscribes,
My loue shall in my verse euer liue young.
My most full flame should afterwards burne cleerer.
My most true minde thus maketh mine vntrue.
My name be buried where my body is,
My nobler part to my grose bodies treason,
My reason the Phisition to my loue,
My sawsie barke (inferior farre to his)
My selfe Ile forfeit, so that other mine,
My selfe corrudiv.1.titleng saluing thy amisse,
My sinfull earth these rebbell powres that thee array,
My soule doth tell my body that he may,
My spirit is thine the better part of me,
My sweet loues beauty, though my louers life.
My thoughts and my discourse as mad mens are,
85: My toung-tide Muse in manners holds her still
My toung-tide Muse in manners holds her still,
My toung-tide patience with too much disdaine:
My verse alone had all thy gentle grace,
Naming thy name, blesses an ill report.
Natiuity once in the maine of light.
Natures bequest giues nothing but doth lend,
Nay if thou lowrst on me doe I not spend
Nay if you read this line, remember not,
Needes must I vnder my transgression bow,
Neither in inward worth nor outward faire
Neuer beleeue though in my nature raign’d,
123: No Time, thou shalt not bost that I doe change
No Time, thou shalt not bost that I doe change,
No bitternesse that I will bitter thinke,
Noe, I am that I am, and they that leuell
Noe, let me be obsequious in thy heart,
71: Noe longer mourne for me when I am dead
Noe longer mourne for me when I am dead,
No it was buylded far from accident,
No longer yours, then you your selfe here liue,
No loue, my loue, that thou maist true loue call,
No loue toward others in that bosome sits
No maruaile then though I mistake my view,
No matter then although my foote did stand
No more bee greeu’d at that which thou hast done,
35: No more bee greeu’d at that which thou hast done
None else to me, nor I to none aliue,
No, neither he, nor his compiers by night
No newes but health from their Phisitions know.
No praise to thee, but what in thee doth liue.
Nor Mars his sword, nor warres quick fire shall burne
Nor are mine eares with thy toungs tune delighted,
Nor can I fortune to breefe mynuits tell;
Nor can thy shame giue phisicke to my griefe,
Nor dare I chide the world without end houre,
Nor dare I question with my iealious thought,
Nor did I wonder at the Lillies white,
Nor double pennance to correct correction.
Nor draw noe lines there with thine antique pen,
Nor gates of steele so strong but time decayes?
Nor giues to necessary wrinckles place,
Nor his owne vision houlds what it doth catch:
Nor it nor noe remembrance what it was.
Nor loose possession of that faire thou ow’st,
Nor my beloued as an Idoll show,
Nor need I tallies thy deare loue to skore,
Nor praise the deepe vermillion in the Rose,
Nor seruices to doe til you require.
Nor shall death brag thou wandr’st in his shade,
Nor taste, nor smell, desire to be inuited
Nor tender feeling to base touches prone,
Nor that full Starre that vshers in the Eauen
Nor thinke the bitternesse of absence sowre,
Nor thou with publike kindnesse honour me,
No shape so true, no truth of such account,
Not blame your pleasure be it ill or well.
Not by our feeling, but by others seeing.
Not from the stars do I my iudgement plucke,
14: Not from the stars do I my iudgement plucke
Nothing sweet boy, but yet like prayers diuine,
Not making worse what nature made so cleere,
Not marble, nor the guilded monument,
55: Not marble, nor the guilded monument
Not mine owne feares, nor the prophetick soule,
107: Not mine owne feares, nor the prophetick soule
Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine,
Not prizing her poore infants discontent;
Not that the summer is lesse pleasant now
Not wondring at the present, nor the past,
Now all is done, haue what shall haue no end,
No want of conscience hold it that I call,
Now counting best to be with you alone,
Now is the time that face should forme an other,
Now proud as an inioyer, and anon
Now see what good-turnes eyes for eies haue done,
Now stand you on the top of happie houres,
Now this ill wresting world is growne so bad,
Now while the world is bent my deeds to crosse,
Now with the drops of this most balmie time,
O benefit of ill, now I finde true
O but with mine, compare thou thine owne state,
O call not me to iustifie the wrong,
139: O call not me to iustifie the wrong
O carue not with thy howers my loues faire brow,
O change thy thought, that I may change my minde,
O cunning loue, with teares thou keepst me blinde,
Of Princes shall out-liue this powrefull rime,
Of bird, of flowre, or shape which it doth lack,
Of different flowers in odor and in hew,
O fearefull meditation, where alack,
Of faults conceald, wherein I am attainted:
Of hand, of foote, of lip, of eye, of brow,
Of him, my selfe, and thee I am forsaken,
Of his quick obiects hath the minde no part,
Of his selfe loue to stop posterity?
Of more delight then Hawkes or Horses bee:
Of mouthed graues will giue thee memorie,
Of my dull bearer, when from thee I speed,
111: O for my sake doe you with fortune chide
O for my sake doe you with fortune chide,
Of others voyces, that my Adders sence,
Of plagues, of dearths, or seasons quallity,
Of publike honour and proud titles bost,
Of thee, thy record neuer can be mist:
Of their faire health, recounting it to me.
Of their faire subiect, blessing euery booke.
Of their sweet deathes, are sweetest odors made:
Of the wide world, dreaming on things to come,
Of this our time, all you prefiguring,
Oh absence what a torment wouldst thou proue,
Oh blame me not if I no more can write
Oh from what powre hast thou this powrefull might,
Oh giue thy selfe the thankes if ought in me,
Oh how much more doth beautie beautious seeme,
54: Oh how much more doth beautie beautious seeme
39: Oh how thy worth with manners may I singe
Oh how thy worth with manners may I singe,
O him she stores, to show what welth she had,
Oh in what sweets doest thou thy sinnes inclose
Oh let me suffer (being at your beck)
80: O how I faint when I of you do write
O how I faint when I of you do write,
O how shall summers hunny breath hold out,
Oh sure I am the wits of former daies,
Oh that record could with a back-ward looke,
Oh then voutsafe me but this louing thought,
Oh though I loue what others doe abhor,
Oh tis the first, tis flatry in my seeing,
Oh truant Muse what shalbe thy amends,
101: Oh truant Muse what shalbe thy amends
Oh what a happy title do I finde,
Oh what a mansion haue those vices got,
O if (I say) you looke vpon this verse,
O know sweet loue I alwaies write of you,
O learne to read what silent loue hath writ,
72: O least the world should taske you to recite
O least the world should taske you to recite,
O least your true loue may seeme falce in this,
O let it then as well beseeme thy heart
O let me true in loue but truly write,
O let my books be then the eloquence,
O loues best habit is in seeming trust,
O me what eyes hath loue put in my head,
148: O me what eyes hath loue put in my head
On Hellens cheeke all art of beautie set,
On both sides thus is simple truth supprest:
Onely my plague thus farre I count my gaine,
One of her fethered creatures broake away,
One on anothers necke do witnesse beare
One thing expressing, leaues out difference.
109: O neuer say that I was false of heart
O neuer say that I was false of heart,
One will of mine to make thy large Will more.
On newer proofe, to trie an older friend,
O no, it is an euer fixed marke
O none but vnthrifts, deare my loue you know,
O none, vnlesse this miracle haue might,
O no, thy loue though much, is not so great,
On purpose layd to make the taker mad.
On whom froun’st thou that I doe faune vpon.
On your broad maine doth wilfully appeare.
Or I shall liue your Epitaph to make,
81: Or I shall liue your Epitaph to make
Or any of these all, or all, or more
Or as sweet season’d shewers are to the ground:
Or as the ward-robe which the robe doth hide,
Or at the least, so long as braine and heart
Or at your hand th’ account of houres to craue,
Or (being wrackt) I am a worthlesse bote,
Or bends with the remouer to remoue.
Or captaine Iewells in the carconet.
Or durst inhabit on a liuing brow:
Ore-charg’d with burthen of mine owne loues might:
Or else of thee this I prognosticate,
Or else receau’st with pleasure thine annoy?
Ore whome their fingers walke with gentle gate,
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew:
Or gluttoning on all, or all away,
Or heart in loue with sighes himselfe doth smother;
Or if it do, not from those lips of thine,
Or if it weare it bore not beauties name:
Or if they haue, where is my iudgment fled,
Or if they sing, tis with so dull a cheere,
Or if they sleepe, thy picture in my sight
Or layd great bases for eternity,
Or made them swere against the thing they see.
Or mee to whom thou gau’st it, else mistaking,
Or mine eyes seeing this, say this is not
Or on my frailties why are frailer spies;
Or say with Princes if it shal go wel
Or some fierce thing repleat with too much rage,
Or state it selfe confounded, to decay,
Or ten times happier be it ten for one,
Or to thy selfe at least kind harted proue,
Or what strong hand can hold his swift foote back,
Or whether doth my minde being crown’d with you
Or whether reuolution be the same.
Or whether shall I say mine eie saith true,
Or who his spoile or beautie can forbid?
Or who is he so fond will be the tombe,
Or you suruiue when I in earth am rotten,
O that our night of wo might haue remembred
13: O that you were your selfe, but loue you are
O that you were your selfe, but loue you are
O therefore loue be of thy selfe so wary,
Others, but stewards of their excellence:
Othes of thy loue, thy truth, thy constancie,
126: O thou my louely Boy who in thy power
O thou my louely Boy who in thy power,
Our blushing shame, an other white dispaire:
Our dates are breefe, and therefor we admire,
Our loue was new, and then but in the spring,
O what excuse will my poore beast then find,
Painting my age with beauty of thy daies,
Painting thy outward walls so costlie gay?
Past cure I am, now Reason is past care,
Past reason hated as a swollowed bayt,
Past reason hunted, and no sooner had
Perforce am thine and all that is in me.
Pittie me then deare friend, and I assure yee,
Pittifull thriuors in their gazing spent.
Pitty me then, and wish I were renu’de,
Pitty the world, or else this glutton be,
Plods duly on, to beare that waight in me,
Plucke the keene teeth from the fierce Tygers yawes,
Pointing to each his thunder, raine and winde,
Points on me gratiously with faire aspect,
Poore soule the center of my sinfull earth,
146: Poore soule the center of my sinfull earth
Possessing or pursuing no delight
Potions of Eysell gainst my strong infection,
Praising thy worth, dispight his cruell hand.
Presents their shaddoe to my sightles view,
Presume not on thy heart when mine is slaine,
Prison my heart in thy steele bosomes warde,
Profitles vserer why doost thou vse
Proouing his beautie by succession thine.
Receiuing naughts by elements so sloe,
Resembling sier, and child, and happy mother,
Resembling strong youth in his middle age,
Reserue their Character with goulden quill,
Reserue them for my loue, not for their rime,
Returne forgetfull Muse, and straight redeeme,
Returne of loue, more blest may be the view.
Reuenge vpon my selfe with present mone?
Richer then wealth, prouder then garments cost,
Rise resty Muse, my loues sweet face suruay,
Robbing no ould to dresse his beauty new,
Robd others beds reuenues of their rents.
Roote pittie in thy heart that when it growes,
Roses haue thornes, and siluer fountaines mud,
Roses of shaddow, since his Rose is true?
Rough windes do shake the darling buds of Maie,
Ruine hath taught me thus to ruminate
Sap checkt with frost and lustie leau’s quite gon.
Sauage, extreame, rude, cruell, not to trust,
Saue breed to braue him, when he takes thee hence.
Saue that my soules imaginary sight
Saue that to dye, I leaue my loue alone.
Saue thou my Rose, in it thou art my all.
Saue what is had, or must from you be tooke.
Saue where thou art not, though I feele thou art,
Saue where you are, how happy you make those.
Say that thou didst forsake mee for some falt,
89: Say that thou didst forsake mee for some falt
Seeking that beautious roofe to ruinate
Seemes seeing, but effectually is out:
Selfe, so selfe louing were iniquity,
Seruing with lookes his sacred maiesty,
Sets downe her babe and makes all swift dispatch
Sets you most rich in youth before my sight,
Shakespeare: Sonnets 117: Accuse me thus, that I haue scanted all
Shakespeare: Sonnets 63: Against my loue shall be as I am now
Shakespeare: Sonnets 49: Against that time (if euer that time come)
Shakespeare: Sonnets 67: Ah wherefore with infection should he liue
Shakespeare: Sonnets 103: Alack what pouerty my Muse brings forth
Shakespeare: Sonnets 110: Alas ’tis true, I haue gone here and there
Shakespeare: Sonnets 37: As a decrepit father takes delight
Shakespeare: Sonnets 23: As an vnperfect actor on the stage
Shakespeare: Sonnets 11: As fast as thou shalt wane so fast thou grow’st
Shakespeare: Sonnets 20: A womans face with natures owne hand painted
Shakespeare: Sonnets 57: Being your slaue what should I doe but tend
Shakespeare: Sonnets 133: Beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groane
Shakespeare: Sonnets 47: Betwixt mine eye and heart a league is tooke
Shakespeare: Sonnets 140: Be wise as thou art cruell, do not presse
Shakespeare: Sonnets 74: But be contented when that fell arest
Shakespeare: Sonnets 92: But doe thy worst to steale thy selfe away
Shakespeare: Sonnets 16: But wherefore do not you a mightier waie
Shakespeare: Sonnets 149: Canst thou O cruell, say I loue thee not
Shakespeare: Sonnets 153: Cupid laid by his brand and fell a sleepe
Shakespeare: Sonnets 19: Deuouring time blunt thou the Lyons pawes
Shakespeare: Sonnets 114: Drinke vp the monarks plague this flattery?
Shakespeare: Sonnets 87: Farewell thou art too deare for my possessing
Shakespeare: Sonnets 10: For shame deny that thou bear’st loue to any
Shakespeare: Sonnets 1: From fairest creatures we desire increase
Shakespeare: Sonnets 98: From you haue I beene absent in the spring
Shakespeare: Sonnets 33: Full many a glorious morning haue I seene
Shakespeare: Sonnets 28: How can I then returne in happy plight
Shakespeare: Sonnets 38: How can my Muse want subiect to inuent
Shakespeare: Sonnets 48: How carefull was I when I tooke my way
Shakespeare: Sonnets 50: How heauie doe I iourney on the way
Shakespeare: Sonnets 97: How like a Winter hath my absence beene
Shakespeare: Sonnets 128: How oft when thou my musike musike playst
Shakespeare: Sonnets 95: How sweet and louely dost thou make the shame
Shakespeare: Sonnets 44: If the dull substance of my flesh were thought
Shakespeare: Sonnets 59: If their bee nothing new, but that which is
Shakespeare: Sonnets 32: If thou suruiue my well contented daie
Shakespeare: Sonnets 136: If thy soule check thee that I come so neere
Shakespeare: Sonnets 82: I grant thou wert not married to my Muse
Shakespeare: Sonnets 83: I neuer saw that you did painting need
Shakespeare: Sonnets 141: In faith I doe not loue thee with mine eyes
Shakespeare: Sonnets 152: In louing thee thou know’st I am forsworne
Shakespeare: Sonnets 127: In the ould age blacke was not counted faire
Shakespeare: Sonnets 9: Is it for feare to wet a widdowes eye
Shakespeare: Sonnets 61: Is it thy wil, thy Image should keepe open
Shakespeare: Sonnets 36: Let me confesse that we two must be twaine
Shakespeare: Sonnets 116: Let me not to the marriage of true mindes
Shakespeare: Sonnets 105: Let not my loue be cal’d Idolatrie
Shakespeare: Sonnets 25: Let those who are in fauor with their stars
Shakespeare: Sonnets 60: Like as the waues make towards the pibled shore
Shakespeare: Sonnets 118: Like as to make our appetites more keene
Shakespeare: Sonnets 143: Loe as a carefull huswife runnes to catch
Shakespeare: Sonnets 7: Loe in the Orient when the gracious light
Shakespeare: Sonnets 3: Looke in thy glasse and tell the face thou vewest
Shakespeare: Sonnets 26: Lord of my loue, to whome in vassalage
Shakespeare: Sonnets 142: Loue is my sinne, and thy deare vertue hate
Shakespeare: Sonnets 151: Loue is too young to know what conscience is
Shakespeare: Sonnets 46: Mine eye and heart are at a mortall warre
Shakespeare: Sonnets 24: Mine eye hath play’d the painter and hath steeld
Shakespeare: Sonnets 8: Musick to heare, why hear’st thou musick sadly
Shakespeare: Sonnets 130: My Mistres eyes are nothing like the Sunne
Shakespeare: Sonnets 22: My glasse shall not perswade me I am ould
Shakespeare: Sonnets 147: My loue is as a feauer longing still
Shakespeare: Sonnets 85: My toung-tide Muse in manners holds her still
Shakespeare: Sonnets 123: No Time, thou shalt not bost that I doe change
Shakespeare: Sonnets 71: Noe longer mourne for me when I am dead
Shakespeare: Sonnets 35: No more bee greeu’d at that which thou hast done
Shakespeare: Sonnets 14: Not from the stars do I my iudgement plucke
Shakespeare: Sonnets 55: Not marble, nor the guilded monument
Shakespeare: Sonnets 107: Not mine owne feares, nor the prophetick soule
Shakespeare: Sonnets 139: O call not me to iustifie the wrong
Shakespeare: Sonnets 111: O for my sake doe you with fortune chide
Shakespeare: Sonnets 54: Oh how much more doth beautie beautious seeme
Shakespeare: Sonnets 39: Oh how thy worth with manners may I singe
Shakespeare: Sonnets 80: O how I faint when I of you do write
Shakespeare: Sonnets 101: Oh truant Muse what shalbe thy amends
Shakespeare: Sonnets 72: O least the world should taske you to recite
Shakespeare: Sonnets 148: O me what eyes hath loue put in my head
Shakespeare: Sonnets 109: O neuer say that I was false of heart
Shakespeare: Sonnets 81: Or I shall liue your Epitaph to make
Shakespeare: Sonnets 13: O that you were your selfe, but loue you are
Shakespeare: Sonnets 126: O thou my louely Boy who in thy power
Shakespeare: Sonnets 146: Poore soule the center of my sinfull earth
Shakespeare: Sonnets 89: Say that thou didst forsake mee for some falt
Shakespeare: Sonnets 18: Shall I compare thee to a Summers day?
Shakespeare: Sonnets 113: Since I left you, mine eye is in my minde
Shakespeare: Sonnets 65: Since brasse, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundlesse sea
Shakespeare: Sonnets 62: Sinne of selfe-loue possesseth al mine eie
Shakespeare: Sonnets 52: So am I as the rich whose blessed key
Shakespeare: Sonnets 75: So are you to my thoughts as food to life
Shakespeare: Sonnets 21: So is it not with me as with that Muse
Shakespeare: Sonnets 91: Some glory in their birth, some in their skill
Shakespeare: Sonnets 96: Some say thy fault is youth, some wantonesse
Shakespeare: Sonnets 134: So now I haue confest that he is thine
Shakespeare: Sonnets 78: So oft haue I inuok’d thee for my Muse
Shakespeare: Sonnets 93: So shall I liue, supposing thou art true
Shakespeare: Sonnets 56: Sweet loue renew thy force, be it not said
Shakespeare: Sonnets 40: Take all my loues, my loue, yea take them all
Shakespeare: Sonnets 58: That God forbid, that made me first your slaue
Shakespeare: Sonnets 102: That loue is marchandiz’d, whose ritch esteeming
Shakespeare: Sonnets 70: That thou are blam’d shall not be thy defect
Shakespeare: Sonnets 42: That thou hast her is not all my griefe
Shakespeare: Sonnets 73: That time of yeare thou maist in me behold
Shakespeare: Sonnets 120: That you were once vnkind be-friends mee now
Shakespeare: Sonnets 99: The forward violet thus did I chide
Shakespeare: Sonnets 154: The little Loue-God lying once a sleepe
Shakespeare: Sonnets 90: Then hate me when thou wilt, if euer, now
Shakespeare: Sonnets 6: Then let not winters wragged hand deface
Shakespeare: Sonnets 45: The other two, slight ayre, and purging fire
Shakespeare: Sonnets 129: Th’expence of Spirit in a waste of shame
Shakespeare: Sonnets 94: They that haue powre to hurt, and will doe none
Shakespeare: Sonnets 132: Thine eies I loue, and they as pittying me
Shakespeare: Sonnets 5: Those howers that with gentle worke did frame
Shakespeare: Sonnets 115: Those lines that I before haue writ doe lie
Shakespeare: Sonnets 145: Those lips that Loues owne hand did make
Shakespeare: Sonnets 69: Those parts of thee that the worlds eye doth view
Shakespeare: Sonnets 41: Those pretty wrongs that liberty commits
Shakespeare: Sonnets 131: Thou art as tiranous, so as thou art
Shakespeare: Sonnets 137: Thou blinde foole loue, what doost thou to mine eyes
Shakespeare: Sonnets 51: Thus can my loue excuse the slow offence
Shakespeare: Sonnets 68: Thus is his cheeke the map of daies out-worne
Shakespeare: Sonnets 31: Thy bosome is indeared with all hearts
Shakespeare: Sonnets 77: Thy glasse will shew thee how thy beauties were
Shakespeare: Sonnets 122: Thy guift, thy tables, are within my braine
Shakespeare: Sonnets 121: Tis better to be vile then vile esteemed
Shakespeare: Sonnets 104: To me faire friend you neuer can be old
Shakespeare: Sonnets 144: Two loues I haue of comfort and dispaire
Shakespeare: Sonnets 66: Tyr’d with all these for restfull death I cry
Shakespeare: Sonnets 4: Vnthrifty louelinesse why dost thou spend
Shakespeare: Sonnets 86: Was it the proud full saile of his great verse
Shakespeare: Sonnets 27: Weary with toyle, I hast me to my bed
Shakespeare: Sonnets 125: Wer’t ought to me I bore the canopy
Shakespeare: Sonnets 53: What is your substance, whereof are you made
Shakespeare: Sonnets 119: What potions haue I drunke of Syren teares
Shakespeare: Sonnets 108: What’s in the braine that Inck may character
Shakespeare: Sonnets 15: When I consider euery thing that growes
Shakespeare: Sonnets 12: When I doe count the clock that tels the time
Shakespeare: Sonnets 64: When I haue seene by times fell hand defaced
Shakespeare: Sonnets 2: When fortie Winters shall beseige thy brow
Shakespeare: Sonnets 29: When in disgrace with Fortune and mens eyes
Shakespeare: Sonnets 106: When in the Chronicle of wasted time
Shakespeare: Sonnets 43: When most I winke then doe mine eyes best see
Shakespeare: Sonnets 138: When my loue sweares that she is made of truth
Shakespeare: Sonnets 88: When thou shalt be disposde to set me light
Shakespeare: Sonnets 30: When to the Sessions of sweet silent thought
Shakespeare: Sonnets 100: Where art thou Muse that thou forgetst so long
Shakespeare: Sonnets 79: Whilst I alone did call vpon thy ayde
Shakespeare: Sonnets 135: Who euer hath her wish, thou hast thy Will
Shakespeare: Sonnets 84: Who is it that sayes most, which can say more
Shakespeare: Sonnets 17: Who will beleeue my verse in time to come
Shakespeare: Sonnets 34: Why didst thou promise such a beautious day
Shakespeare: Sonnets 76: Why is my verse so barren of new pride?
Shakespeare: Sonnets 150: With insufficiency my heart to sway
Shakespeare: Sonnets 124: Yf my deare loue were but the childe of state
Shakespeare: Sonnets 112: Your loue and pittie doth th’impression fill
18: Shall I compare thee to a Summers day?
Shall I compare thee to a Summers day?
Shall hate be fairer log’d then gentle loue?
Shall naigh noe dull flesh in his fiery race,
Shall profit thee, and much inrich thy booke.
Shall reasons finde of setled grauitie.
Shall sum my count, and make my old excuse
Shall times best Iewell from times chest lie hid?
Shall will in others seeme right gracious,
Shall wormes inheritors of this excesse,
Shall you pace forth, your praise shall stil finde roome,
She caru’d thee for her seale, and ment therby,
She keepes thee to this purpose, that her skill,
She may detaine, but not still keepe her tresure
Shewing their birth, and where they did proceed?
Shifts but his place, for still the world inioyes it
Show me your image in some antique booke,
Simply I credit her false speaking tongue,
113: Since I left you, mine eye is in my minde
Since I left you, mine eye is in my minde,
Since all alike my songs and praises be
Since brasse, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundlesse sea,
65: Since brasse, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundlesse sea
Since euery one, hath euery one, one shade,
Since first I saw you fresh which yet are greene.
Since from thee going, he went wilfull slow,
Since minde at first in carrecter was done.
Since my appeale saies I did striue to prooue
Since sausie Iackes so happy are in this,
Since sildom comming in the long yeare set,
Since spight of him Ile liue in this poore rime,
Since sweets and beauties do them-selues forsake,
Since that my life on thy reuolt doth lie,
Since what he owes thee, thou thy selfe doost pay,
Since why to loue, I can alledge no cause.
Sings this to thee thou single wilt proue none.
Sing to the eare that doth thy laies esteeme,
Sinkes downe to death, opprest with melancholie.
62: Sinne of selfe-loue possesseth al mine eie
Sinne of selfe-loue possesseth al mine eie,
Slandring Creation with a false esteeme,
So I for feare of trust, forget to say,
So I, made lame by Fortunes dearest spight
So I returne rebukt to my content,
So all my best is dressing old words new,
So all their praises are but prophesies
52: So am I as the rich whose blessed key
So am I as the rich whose blessed key,
So are those errors that in thee are seene,
75: So are you to my thoughts as food to life
So are you to my thoughts as food to life,
So do our minuites hasten to their end,
So dost thou too, and therein dignifi’d:
So either by thy picture or my loue,
So far from variation or quicke change?
So farre from home into my deeds to prye,
So flatter I the swart complexiond night,
So great a summe of summes yet can’st not liue?
So him I loose through my vnkinde abuse.
21: So is it not with me as with that Muse
So is it not with me as with that Muse,
So is my loue still telling what is told,
So is the time that keepes you as my chest,
So long as men can breath or eyes can see,
So long as youth and thou are of one date,
So long liues this, and this giues life to thee,
So loue be thou, although too daie thou fill
Some fresher stampe of the time bettering dayes.
91: Some glory in their birth, some in their skill
Some glory in their birth, some in their skill,
Some in their Hawkes and Hounds, some in their Horse.
Some in their garments though new-fangled ill:
Some in their wealth, some in their bodies force,
96: Some say thy fault is youth, some wantonesse
Some say thy fault is youth, some wantonesse,
Some say thy grace is youth and gentle sport,
Some-time all ful with feasting on your sight,
Sometime too hot the eye of heauen shines,
Sonnets
134: So now I haue confest that he is thine
So now I haue confest that he is thine,
78: So oft haue I inuok’d thee for my Muse
So oft haue I inuok’d thee for my Muse,
So runst thou after that which flies from thee,
93: So shall I liue, supposing thou art true
So shall I liue, supposing thou art true,
So shall those blots that do with me remaine,
So shalt thou feed on death, that feeds on men,
So should my papers (yellowed with their age)
So should that beauty which you hold in lease
So should the lines of life that life repaire
So that eternall loue in loues fresh case,
So that my selfe bring water for my staine,
So then I am not lame, poore, nor dispis’d,
So then thou hast but lost the dregs of life,
So thou beeing rich in Will adde to thy Will,
So thou be good, slander doth but approue,
So thou preuentst his sieth, and crooked knife.
So thou through windowes of thine age shalt see,
So thou, thy selfe out-going in thy noon:
So thy great guift vpon misprision growing,
So til the iudgement that your selfe arise,
So true a foole is loue, that in your Will,
So will I pray that thou maist haue thy Will,
So you ore-greene my bad, my good alow?
So your sweete hew, which me thinkes still doth stand
Speake of my lamenesse, and I straight will halt:
Speake of the spring, and foyzon of the yeare,
Speaking of worth, what worth in you doth grow,
Spending againe what is already spent:
Spendst thou thy furie on some worthlesse songe,
Steale from his figure, and no pace perceiu’d,
Stealing away the treasure of his Spring.
Stealing vnseene to west with this disgrace:
Still constant in a wondrous excellence,
Still loosing when I saw my selfe to win?
Stird by a painted beauty to his verse,
Straight in her heart did mercie come,
Strikes each in each by mutuall ordering;
Such cherubines as your sweet selfe resemble,
Such ciuill war is in my loue and hate,
Such heauenly touches nere toucht earthly faces.
Such is my loue, to thee I so belong,
Such seemes your beautie still: Three Winters colde,
Suffring my friend for my sake to approoue her,
Suns of the world may staine, whe[n] heauens sun staineth.
Supposde as forfeit to a confin’d doome.
Suspect I may, yet not directly tell,
Sweare to thy blind soule that I was thy Will,
Sweet beauty hath no name no holy boure,
Sweete flattery, then she loues but me alone.
56: Sweet loue renew thy force, be it not said
Sweet loue renew thy force, be it not said
Sweets with sweets warre not, ioy delights in ioy:
Sweet theefe whence didst thou steale thy sweet that |(smels
Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth.
Take all my loues, my loue, yea take them all,
40: Take all my loues, my loue, yea take them all
Take heed (deare heart) of this large priuiledge,
Tan sacred beautie, blunt the sharp’st intents,
Tell me thou lou’st else-where; but in my sight,
Tempteth my better angel from my sight,
Ten times thy selfe were happier then thou art,
58: That God forbid, that made me first your slaue
That God forbid, that made me first your slaue,
That I an accessary needs must be,
That I haue frequent binne with vnknown mindes,
That I haue hoysted saile to al the windes
That I in thy abundance am suffic’d,
That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot,
That I may not be so, nor thou be lyde,
That I might see what the old world could say,
That Musicke hath a farre more pleasing sound:
That Time will come and take my loue away.
That all the world besides me thinkes y’are dead.
That am debard the benifit of rest?
That beauty still may liue in thine or thee.
That better is, by euil still made better.
That by this seperation I may giue:
That censures falsely what they see aright?
That did my ripe thoughts in my braine inhearce,
That did not better for my life prouide,
That doe not do the thing, they most do showe,
That due of many, now is thine alone.
That due to thee which thou deseru’st alone:
That euery toung saies beauty should looke so.
That euery word doth almost fel my name,
That follow’d it as gentle day,
That for thy right, my selfe will beare all wrong.
That gainst thy selfe thou stickst not to conspire,
That hath his windowes glazed with thine eyes:
That haue prophan’d their scarlet ornaments,
That hauing such a skope to show her pride,
That heales the wound, and cures not the disgrace:
That heauens ayre in this huge rondure hems,
That heauie Saturne laught and leapt with him.
That he shall neuer cut from memory
That in black inck my loue may still shine bright.
That in my minde thy worst all best exceeds?
That in the very refuse of thy deeds,
That in thy face sweet loue should euer dwell,
That is my home of loue, if I haue rang’d,
That is so proude thy seruice to dispise,
That is so vext with watching and with teares?
That it could so preposterouslie be stain’d,
That it nor growes with heat, nor drownes with showres.
That leaues looke pale, dreading the Winters neere.
That lookes on tempests and is neuer shaken;
That loue is marchandiz’d, whose ritch esteeming,
102: That loue is marchandiz’d, whose ritch esteeming
That may expresse my loue, or thy deare merit?
That millions of strange shaddowes on you tend?
That mine eye loues it and doth first beginne.
That my steel’d sence or changes right or wrong,
That nothing me, a some-thing sweet to thee.
That on himselfe such murdrous shame commits.
That on the ashes of his youth doth lye,
That ouer-goes my blunt inuention quite,
That poore retention could not so much hold,
That’s for thy selfe to breed an other thee,
That she hath thee is of my wayling cheefe,
That she might thinke me some vntuterd youth,
That she that makes me sinne, awards me paine.
That sinne by him aduantage should atchiue,
That some-times anger thrusts into his hide,
That then I skorne to change my state with Kings.
That thereby beauties Rose might neuer die,
That they behold and see not what they see:
That they else-where might dart their iniuries:
That this huge stage presenteth nought but showes
That thou among the wastes of time must goe,
That thou are blam’d shall not be thy defect,
70: That thou are blam’d shall not be thy defect
That thou consum’st thy selfe in single life?
That thou hast her is not all my griefe,
42: That thou hast her is not all my griefe
That thou in loosing me, shall win much glory:
That thou no forme of thee hast left behind,
That thy vnkindnesse layes vpon my heart,
That time of yeare thou maist in me behold,
73: That time of yeare thou maist in me behold
That to his subiect lends not some small glory,
That to my vse it might vn-vsed stay
That tongue that tells the story of thy daies,
That vse is not forbidden vsery,
That weare this world out to the ending doome.
That you are you, so dignifies his story.
That you for loue speake well of me vntrue,
That you were once vnkind be-friends mee now,
120: That you were once vnkind be-friends mee now
That you your selfe being extant well might show,
That you your selfe may priuiledge your time
The Canker bloomes haue full as deepe a die,
The Charter of thy worth giues thee releasing:
The Croe, or Doue, it shapes them to your feature.
The Lillie I condemned for thy hand,
The Rose lookes faire, but fairer we it deeme
The Roses fearefully on thornes did stand,
The age to come would say this Poet lies,
The argument all bare is of more worth
The barren tender of a Poets debt:
The basest Iewell wil be well esteem’d:
The basest weed out-braues his dignity:
The beast that beares me, tired with my woe,
The better angell is a man right faire:
The bloody spurre cannot prouoke him on,
The bountious largesse giuen thee to giue?
The boy for triall needes would touch my brest,
The cause of this faire guift in me is wanting,
The cleere eyes moyitie, and the deare hearts part.
The constancy and virtue of your loue
The coward conquest of a wretches knife,
The deare repose for lims with trauaill tired,
The dedicated words which writers vse
The earth can haue but earth, which is his due,
The earth can yeeld me but a common graue,
Thee haue I not lockt vp in any chest,
The eyes (fore dutious) now conuerted are
The fayrest votary tooke vp that fire,
The first my thought, the other my desire,
99: The forward violet thus did I chide
The forward violet thus did I chide,
The guiltie goddesse of my harmfull deeds,
The hand that writ it, for I loue you so,
The hardest knife ill vs’d doth loose his edge.
The humble as the proudest saile doth beare,
The humble salue, which wounded bosomes fits
The ills that were, not grew to faults assured,
The iniuries that to my selfe I doe,
Their images I lou’d, I view in thee,
Their outward thus with outward praise is crownd,
Theirs for their stile ile read, his for his loue.
Their worth the greater beeing woo’d of time,
The little Loue-God lying once a sleepe,
154: The little Loue-God lying once a sleepe
The liuing record of your memory.
The louely gaze where euery eye doth dwell
The manner of my pittie wanting paine,
The more I heare and see iust cause of hate,
The mortall Moone hath her eclipse indur’de,
The most sweet-fauor or deformedst creature,
The mountaine, or the sea, the day, or night:
Then beautious nigard why doost thou abuse,
Then being askt, where all thy beautie lies,
Then betterd that the world may see my pleasure,
Then both your Poets can in praise deuise.
Then can I drowne an eye (vn-vs’d to flow)
Then can I greeue at greeuances fore-gon,
Then can no horse with my desire keepe pace,
Thence comes it that my name receiues a brand,
Then churls their thoughts (although their eies were kind)
Then do thy office Muse, I teach thee how,
Then gentle cheater vrge not my amisse,
Then giue me welcome, next my heauen the best,
Then happy I that loue and am beloued
Then hate me when thou wilt, if euer, now,
90: Then hate me when thou wilt, if euer, now
Then how when nature calls thee to be gone,
Then if for my loue, thou my loue receiuest,
Then if he thriue and I be cast away,
Then in the blazon of sweet beauties best,
Then in the breath that from my Mistres reekes.
Then in the number let me passe vntold,
Then lackt I matter, that infeebled mine.
Then let not winters wragged hand deface,
6: Then let not winters wragged hand deface
Then look I death my daies should expiate.
Then may I dare to boast how I doe loue thee,
Then need I not to feare the worst of wrongs,
Then nigard truth would willingly impart:
Then of thy beauty do I question make
Then of your graces and your gifts to tell.
Then others, for the breath of words respect,
Then publick meanes which publick manners breeds.
Then should I spurre though mounted on the wind,
Then soule liue thou vpon thy seruants losse,
Then thanke him not for that which he doth say,
Then that, which on thy humor doth depend.
Then the conceit of this inconstant stay,
Then thinke that we before haue heard them tould:
Then this rich praise, that you alone, are you,
Then those old nine which rimers inuocate,
Then thou alone kingdomes of hearts shouldst owe.
Then thou whose shaddow shaddowes doth make bright,
Then vnswept stone, besmeer’d with sluttish time.
Then were not summers distillation left
Then what could death doe if thou should’st depart,
Then when her mournefull himns did hush the night,
Then when it hath my added praise beside.
Then will I sweare beauty her selfe is blacke,
Then you shall heare the surly sullen bell
The one by toyle, the other to complaine
The one doth shaddow of your beautie show,
The ornament of beauty is suspect,
The other as your bountie doth appeare,
45: The other two, slight ayre, and purging fire
The other two, slight ayre, and purging fire,
The owners tongue doth publish euery where.
The paine be mine, but thine shal be the praise.
The painefull warrier famosed for worth,
The perfect ceremony of loues right,
The pray of wormes, my body being dead,
Therefore I lye with her, and she with me,
Therefore are feasts so sollemne and so rare,
Therefore desire (of perfects loue being made)
Therefore in that I cannot know thy change,
Therefore like her, I some-time hold my tongue:
Therefore my Mistresse eyes are Rauen blacke,
Therefore my verse to constancie confin’de,
Therefore to giue them from me was I bold,
The region cloude hath mask’d him from me now.
There is such strength and warrantise of skill,
There liues more life in one of your faire eyes,
The rich proud cost of outworne buried age,
The right of sepulchers, were shorne away,
The sad account of fore-bemoned mone,
The sea all water, yet receiues raine still,
These blenches gaue my heart an other youth,
The second burthen of a former child?
These offices, so oft as thou wilt looke,
These poore rude lines of thy deceased Louer:
These present absent with swift motion slide.
The skope and tenure of thy Ielousie?
The solue is this, that thou doest common grow.
The sommers flowre is to the sommer sweet,
The spirit of Loue, with a perpetual dulnesse:
The statute of thy beauty thou wilt take,
The sunne it selfe sees not, till heauen cleeres.
The teeming Autumne big with ritch increase,
The vacant leaues thy mindes imprint will beare,
The very part was consecrate to thee,
The which he will not eu’ry hower suruay,
The wiry concord that mine eare confounds,
The world wilbe thy widdow and still weepe,
The world will waile thee like a makelesse wife,
The worser spirit a woman collour’d il.
The worst was this, my loue was my decay.
The worth of that, is that which it containes,
The wrinckles which thy glasse will truly show,
Th’expence of Spirit in a waste of shame
129: Th’expence of Spirit in a waste of shame
They are but dressings of a former sight:
They are the Lords and owners of their faces,
They do but sweetly chide thee, who confounds
They draw but what they see, know not the hart.
They had not still enough your worth to sing:
They know what beautie is, see where it lyes,
They liue vnwoo’d, and vnrespected fade,
They looke into the beauty of thy mind,
They rightly do inherrit heauens graces,
94: They that haue powre to hurt, and will doe none
They that haue powre to hurt, and will doe none,
They weare but sweet, but figures of delight:
Th’ imprison’d absence of your libertie,
Thine by thy beautie beeing false to me.
Thine eies I loue, and they as pittying me,
132: Thine eies I loue, and they as pittying me
Thine eyes, that taught the dumbe on high to sing,
Thine owne sweet argument, to excellent,
Thinke all but one, and me in that one Will.
This I doe vow and this shall euer be,
This brand she quenched in a coole Well by,
This silence for my sinne you did impute,
This thought is as a death which cannot choose
This thou perceu’st, which makes thy loue more strong,
This told, I ioy, but then no longer glad,
This were to be new made when thou art ould,
This wish I haue, then ten times happy me.
Th’offenders sorrow lends but weake reliefe
Those children nurst, deliuerd from thy braine,
Those howers that with gentle worke did frame,
5: Those howers that with gentle worke did frame
Those lines that I before haue writ doe lie,
115: Those lines that I before haue writ doe lie
Those lips that Loues owne hand did make,
145: Those lips that Loues owne hand did make
Those parts of thee that the worlds eye doth view,
69: Those parts of thee that the worlds eye doth view
Those pretty wrongs that liberty commits,
41: Those pretty wrongs that liberty commits
Those that can see thou lou’st, and I am blind.
Thou art as faire in knowledge as in hew,
131: Thou art as tiranous, so as thou art
Thou art as tiranous, so as thou art,
Thou art more louely and more temperate:
Thou art the fairest and most precious Iewell.
Thou art the graue where buried loue doth liue,
Thou art thy mothers glasse and she in thee
Thou best of deerest, and mine onely care,
137: Thou blinde foole loue, what doost thou to mine eyes
Thou blinde foole loue, what doost thou to mine eyes,
Thou by thy dyals shady stealth maist know,
Thou canst not (loue) disgrace me halfe so ill,
Thou canst not then vse rigor in my Iaile.
Thou canst not vex me with inconstant minde,
Thou doo’st beguile the world, vnblesse some mother.
Thou doost loue her, because thou knowst I loue her,
Thou gau’st me thine not to giue backe againe.
Though I (once gone) to all the world must dye,
Though absence seem’d my flame to quallifie,
Though in our liues a seperable spight,
Though in thy stores account I one must be,
Though not to loue, yet loue to tell me so,
Though thou repent, yet I haue still the losse,
Though to it selfe, it onely liue and die,
(Though words come hind-most) holds his ranke before,
Though yet heauen knowes it is but as a tombe
(Though you doe any thing) he thinkes no ill.
Thou hast past by the ambush of young daies,
Thou maist be falce, and yet I know it not.
Thou maist call thine, when thou from youth conuertest,
Thou makst faults graces, that to thee resort:
Thou of thy selfe thy sweet selfe dost deceaue,
Thou shouldst print more, not let that coppy die.
Thou that art now the worlds fresh ornament,
Thou truly faire, wert truly simpathizde,
Thou vsurer that put’st forth all to vse,
Thou wilt restore to be my comfort still:
Three Aprill perfumes in three hot Iunes burn’d,
Three beautious springs to yellow Autumne turn’d,
Three theams in one, which wondrous scope affords.
Through heauy sleepe on sightlesse eyes doth stay?
51: Thus can my loue excuse the slow offence
Thus can my loue excuse the slow offence,
Thus do I pine and surfet day by day,
Thus farre for loue, my loue-sute sweet fullfill.
Thus farre the miles are measurde from thy friend.
Thus haue I had thee as a dreame doth flatter,
Thus is his cheeke the map of daies out-worne,
68: Thus is his cheeke the map of daies out-worne
Thus pollicie in loue t’anticipate
Thus vainely thinking that she thinkes me young,
Th’vncertaine sicklie appetite to please:
Thy aduerse party is thy Aduocate,
Thy beautie, and thy yeares full well befits,
Thy beauties forme in table of my heart,
Thy blacke is fairest in my iudgements place.
31: Thy bosome is indeared with all hearts
Thy bosome is indeared with all hearts,
Thy dyall how thy pretious mynuits waste,
Thy edge should blunter be then apetite,
Thy end is Truthes and Beauties doome and date.
Thy face hath not the power to make loue grone;
Thy glasse will shew thee how thy beauties were,
77: Thy glasse will shew thee how thy beauties were
Thy guift, thy tables, are within my braine
122: Thy guift, thy tables, are within my braine
Thy hungrie eies, euen till they winck with fulnesse,
Thy lookes should nothing thence, but sweetnesse tell.
Thy lookes with me, thy heart in other place.
Thy loue is better then high birth to me,
Thy louers withering, as thy sweet selfe grow’st.
Thy merrit hath my dutie strongly knit;
Thy pitty may deserue to pittied bee.
Thy proud hearts slaue and vassall wretch to be:
Thy pyramyds buylt vp with newer might
Thy registers and thee I both defie,
Thy selfe away, are present still with me,
Thy selfe thou gau’st, thy owne worth then not knowing,
Thy selfe thy foe, to thy sweet selfe too cruell:
Thy sweet beloued name no more shall dwell,
Thy vnus’d beauty must be tomb’d with thee,
Thy youthes proud liuery so gaz’d on now,
Til each to raz’d obliuion yeeld his part
Till I returne of posting is noe need.
Till my bad angel fire my good one out.
Till nature as she wrought thee fell a dotinge,
Til then, not show my head where thou maist proue me
Til whatsoeuer star that guides my mouing,
Time doth transfixe the florish set on youth,
Times theeuish progresse to eternitie.
121: Tis better to be vile then vile esteemed
Tis better to be vile then vile esteemed,
Tis not enough that through the cloude thou breake,
T’is thee (my selfe) that for my selfe I praise,
To any sensuall feast with thee alone:
To base of thee to be remembred,
To beare loues wrong, then hates knowne iniury.
To be deaths conquest and make wormes thine heire.
To be diseas’d ere that there was true needing.
To be so tikled they would change their state,
To bitter sawces did I frame my feeding;
To change your day of youth to sullied night,
To cryttick and to flatterer stopped are:
To doe more for me then mine owne desert,
To dry the raine on my storme-beaten face,
To eate the worlds due, by the graue and thee.
To entertaine the time with thoughts of loue,
To euery Himne that able spirit affords,
To finde where your true Image pictur’d lies,
To find out shames and idle houres in me,
To follow that which flies before her face:
To giue away your selfe, keeps your selfe still,
To giue full growth to that which still doth grow.
To guard the lawfull reasons on thy part,
To heare with eies belongs to loues fine wit.
To hidious winter and confounds him there,
To him that beares the strong offenses losse.
To keepe an adiunckt to remember thee,
To kisse the tender inward of thy hand,
To know my shames and praises from your tounge,
To leape large lengths of miles when thou art gone,
To leaue for nothing all thy summe of good:
To leaue poore me, thou hast the strength of lawes,
To let bace cloudes ore-take me in my way,
To linger out a purposd ouer-throw.
To liue a second life on second head,
To loue that well, which thou must leaue ere long.
To make him much out-liue a gilded tombe:
To make him seeme long hence, as he showes now.
To make me giue the lie to my true sight,
To make me toung-tide speaking of your fame.
To make of monsters, and things indigest,
To make some speciall instant speciall blest,
To march in ranckes of better equipage:
To marre the subiect that before was well,
To me are nothing nouell, nothing strange,
104: To me faire friend you neuer can be old
To me faire friend you neuer can be old,
To me that languisht for her sake:
To morrow sharpned in his former might.
To mourne for me since mourning doth thee grace,
To new found methods, and to compounds strange?
Too morrow see againe, and doe not kill
To one, of one, still such, and euer so.
To plaie the watch-man euer for thy sake.
To put faire truth vpon so foule a face,
To say they erre, I dare not be so bold,
To say within thine owne deepe sunken eyes,
To see his actiue childe do deeds of youth,
To set a forme vpon desired change,
To shew faulse Art what beauty was of yore.
To show me worthy of their sweet respect,
To shun the heauen that leads men to this hell.
To side this title is impannelled
To speake of that which giues thee all thy might?
To stand in thy affaires, fall by thy side.
To subiects worse haue giuen admiring praise.
To swere against the truth so foule a lie.
To take a new acquaintance of thy minde.
To that sweet theefe which sourely robs from me.
To the cleere day with thy much cleerer light,
To thee I send this written ambassage
To the wide world and all her fading sweets:
To this I witnes call the foles of time,
To this composed wonder of your frame,
To thy faire flower ad the rancke smell of weeds,
To thy sweete will making addition thus.
To trust those tables that receaue thee more,
To truths translated, and for true things deem’d.
To tye vp enuy, euermore inlarged,
To waigh how once I suffered in your crime.
Towards thee ile run, and giue him leaue to goe.
To what it workes in, like the Dyers hand,
To what you will, to you it doth belong,
To win me soone to hell my femall euill,
To witnesse duty, not to shew my wit.
To worke my mind, when boddies work’s expired.
Triumph in loue, flesh staies no farther reason,
Truth needs no collour with his collour fixt,
144: Two loues I haue of comfort and dispaire
Two loues I haue of comfort and dispaire,
66: Tyr’d with all these for restfull death I cry
Tyr’d with all these for restfull death I cry,
Tyr’d with all these, from these would I be gone,
Vaunt in their youthfull sap, at height decrease,
Vnder that bond that him as fast doth binde.
Vnder the blow of thralled discontent,
Vnlearned in the worlds false subtilties.
Vnlesse my Nerues were brasse or hammered steele.
Vnlesse this general euill they maintaine,
Vnlesse thou take that honour from thy name:
Vnlesse you would deuise some vertuous lye,
Vnlok’d on diest vnlesse thou get a sonne.
Vnlookt for ioy in that I honour most;
Vnmooued, could, and to temptation slow:
4: Vnthrifty louelinesse why dost thou spend
Vnthrifty louelinesse why dost thou spend,
Vntill liues composition be recured,
Vpon that blessed wood whose motion sounds
Vpon the farthest earth remoou’d from thee,
Vpon the houres, and times of your desire?
Vpon those boughes which shake against the could,
Vpon thy part I can set downe a story
Vpon thy selfe thy beauties legacy?
Vpon thy side, against my selfe ile fight,
Vse power with power, and slay me not by Art,
Vttring bare truth, euen so as foes Commend.
WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE
Waighes not the dust and iniury of age,
Want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend:
Was it his spirit, by spirits taught to write,
86: Was it the proud full saile of his great verse
Was it the proud full saile of his great verse,
Was sleeping by a Virgin hand disarm’d.
Was vsde in giuing gentle dome:
Weary with toyle, I hast me to my bed,
27: Weary with toyle, I hast me to my bed
Weeds among weeds, or flowers with flowers gatherd.
Were an all-eating shame, and thriftlesse praise.
Were it not sinfull then striuing to mend,
Were it not thy soure leisure gaue sweet leaue,
Were to import forgetfulnesse in mee.
Wer’t ought to me I bore the canopy,
125: Wer’t ought to me I bore the canopy
We sicken to shun sicknesse when we purge.
What acceptable Audit can’st thou leaue?
What can mine owne praise to mine owne selfe bring;
What ere thy thoughts, or thy hearts workings be,
What freezings haue I felt, what darke daies seene?
What hast thou then more then thou hadst before?
What is your substance, whereof are you made,
53: What is your substance, whereof are you made
What meanes the world to say it is not so?
What merit liu’d in me that you should loue
What merrit do I in my selfe respect,
What needst thou wound with cunning when thy might
What old Decembers barenesse euery where?
What potions haue I drunke of Syren teares
119: What potions haue I drunke of Syren teares
What’s in the braine that Inck may character,
108: What’s in the braine that Inck may character
What’s new to speake, what now to register,
What strained touches Rhethorick can lend,
What thou dost foyst vpon vs that is ould,
What wretched errors hath my heart committed,
When I against my selfe with thee pertake:
When I am some-time absent from thy heart,
When I behold the violet past prime,
When I breake twenty: I am periur’d most,
When I consider euery thing that growes
15: When I consider euery thing that growes
12: When I doe count the clock that tels the time
When I doe count the clock that tels the time,
When I haue seene by times fell hand defaced
64: When I haue seene by times fell hand defaced
When I haue seene such interchange of state,
When I haue seene the hungry Ocean gaine
When I perceiue that men as plants increase,
When I (perhaps) compounded am with clay,
When I shall see thee frowne on my defects,
When I was certaine ore in-certainty,
When I was wont to greet it with my laies,
When all my best doth worship thy defect,
When all the breathers of this world are dead,
When as thy loue hath cast his vtmost summe,
When beauty liu’d and dy’ed as flowers do now,
Whence hast thou this becomming of things il,
When daies oppression is not eazd by night,
When euery priuat widdow well may keepe,
2: When fortie Winters shall beseige thy brow
When fortie Winters shall beseige thy brow,
When houres haue dreind his blood and fild his brow
When in dead night their faire imperfect shade,
When in disgrace with Fortune and mens eyes,
29: When in disgrace with Fortune and mens eyes
When in eternall lines to time thou grow’st,
106: When in the Chronicle of wasted time
When in the Chronicle of wasted time,
When in the least of them my life hath end,
When lofty trees I see barren of leaues,
When loue conuerted from the thing it was
When most I winke then doe mine eyes best see,
43: When most I winke then doe mine eyes best see
When most impeacht, stands least in thy controule.
When my loue sweares that she is made of truth,
138: When my loue sweares that she is made of truth
When not to be, receiues reproach of being,
When other pettie griefes haue done their spight,
When others would giue life, and bring a tombe.
When proud pide Aprill (drest in all his trim)
When rocks impregnable are not so stoute,
When sometime loftie towers I see downe rased,
When sommers breath their masked buds discloses:
When sparkling stars twire not thou guil’st th’ eauen.
When swift extremity can seeme but slow,
When that churle death my bones with dust shall couer
When that mine eye is famisht for a looke,
When that shall vade, by verse distils your truth.
When thou art all the better part of me?
When thou reuewest this, thou doest reuew,
When thou shalt be disposde to set me light,
88: When thou shalt be disposde to set me light
When thou thy selfe dost giue inuention light?
When to the Sessions of sweet silent thought,
30: When to the Sessions of sweet silent thought
When to vn-seeing eyes thy shade shines so?
When tyrants crests and tombs of brasse are spent.
When wastefull warre shall Statues ouer-turne,
When what I seeke (my wearie trauels end)
When yellow leaues, or none, or few doe hange
When you haue bid your seruant once adieue.
When you intombed in mens eyes shall lye,
When your sweet issue your sweet forme should beare.
Where Cupid got new fire; my mistres eye.
Where I may not remoue, nor be remoued.
Where all the treasure of thy lusty daies;
100: Where art thou Muse that thou forgetst so long
Where art thou Muse that thou forgetst so long,
Where beauties vaile doth couer euery blot,
Where breath most breaths, euen in the mouths of men.
Where cheekes need blood, in thee it is abus’d.
Wherein I should your great deserts repay,
Wherein it findes a ioy aboue the rest,
Whereon the Stars in secret influence comment.
Where thou art forst to breake a two-fold truth:
Where time and outward forme would shew it dead,
Whereto al bonds do tie me day by day,
Whereto the iudgement of my heart is tide?
Whereto th’inuiting time our fashion calls:
Where wastfull time debateth with decay
Where you may be, or your affaires suppose,
Whether we are mended, or where better they,
Which I by lacking haue supposed dead,
Which I new pay as if not payd before.
Which alters when it alteration findes,
Which borrowd from this holie fire of loue,
Which bountious guift thou shouldst in bounty cherrish,
Which but too daie by feeding is alaied,
Which by and by blacke night doth take away,
Which die for goodnes, who haue liu’d for crime.
Which erst from heat did canopie the herd
Which eyes not yet created shall ore-read,
Which for memoriall still with thee shall stay.
Which for their habitation chose out thee,
Which from loues fire tooke heat perpetuall,
Which happies those that pay the willing lone;
Which hath not figur’d to thee my true spirit,
Which haue no correspondence with true sight,
Which heauily he answers with a grone,
Which hides your life, and shewes not halfe your parts:
Which husbandry in honour might vphold,
Which in my bosomes shop is hanging stil,
Which in their wils count bad what I think good?
Which in thy brest doth liue, as thine in me,
Which is not mixt with seconds, knows no art,
Which laboring for inuention beare amisse
Which like a canker in the fragrant Rose,
Which like a iewell (hunge in gastly night)
Which like two spirits do sugiest me still,
Which many Legions of true hearts had warm’d,
Which my heart knowes the wide worlds common place?
Which nightly gulls him with intelligence,
Which on thy soft cheeke for complexion dwells?
Which parts the shore, where two contracted new,
Which proues more short then wast or ruining?
Which rancke of goodnesse would by ill be cured.
Which shall aboue that idle rancke remaine
Which shall be most my glory being dombe,
Which should example where your equall grew,
Which should transport me farthest from your sight.
Which steales mens eyes and womens soules amaseth.
Which this (Times pensel or my pupill pen)
Which though it alter not loues sole effect,
Which three till now, neuer kept seate in one.
Which time and thoughts so sweetly dost deceiue.
Which to repaire should be thy chiefe desire:
Which vsed liues th’executor to be.
Which vulgar scandall stampt vpon my brow,
Which workes on leases of short numbred howers,
While comments of your praise richly compil’d,
While he insults ore dull and speachlesse tribes.
While shadowes like to thee do mocke my sight?
While thou dost breath that poor’st into my verse,
79: Whilst I alone did call vpon thy ayde
Whilst I alone did call vpon thy ayde,
Whilst I (my soueraine) watch the clock for you,
Whilst I thy babe chace thee a farre behind,
Whilst I whome fortune of such tryumph bars
Whilst her neglected child holds her in chace,
Whilst he vpon your soundlesse deepe doth ride,
Whilst it hath thought it selfe so blessed neuer?
Whilst like a willing pacient I will drinke,
Whilst many Nymphes that vou’d chast life to keep,
Whilst my poore lips which should that haruest reape,
Whilst that this shadow doth such substance giue,
Who all in one, one pleasing note do sing:
Who all their parts of me to thee did giue,
Who art as black as hell, as darke as night.
Who ere keepes me, let my heart be his garde,
Who euen but now come back againe assured,
135: Who euer hath her wish, thou hast thy Will
Who euer hath her wish, thou hast thy Will,
Who for thy selfe art so vnprouident
Who hast by wayning growne, and therein shou’st,
Who hateth thee that I doe call my friend,
Who heauen it selfe for ornament doth vse,
Who in dispight of view is pleasd to dote.
Who is it that sayes most, which can say more,
84: Who is it that sayes most, which can say more
Who lead thee in their ryot euen there
Who leaues vnswai’d the likenesse of a man,
Who lets so faire a house fall to decay,
Whome thine eyes wooe as mine importune thee,
Who mouing others, are themselues as stone,
Who pleade for loue, and look for recompence,
Whose action is no stronger then a flower?
Whose fresh repaire if now thou not renewest,
Whose influence is thine, and borne of thee,
Whose speechlesse song being many, seeming one,
Whose strengths abondance weakens his own heart:
Whose worths vnknowne, although his hight be taken.
Who taught thee how to make me loue thee more,
Who will beleeue my verse in time to come
17: Who will beleeue my verse in time to come
Who with his feare is put besides his part,
Why didst thou promise such a beautious day,
34: Why didst thou promise such a beautious day
Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth
Why is my verse so barren of new pride?
76: Why is my verse so barren of new pride?
Why lou’st thou that which thou receaust not gladly,
Why of eyes falsehood hast thou forged hookes,
Why should false painting immitate his cheeke,
Why should he liue, now nature banckrout is,
Why should my heart thinke that a seuerall plot,
Why should poore beautie indirectly seeke,
Why so large cost hauing so short a lease,
Why with the time do I not glance aside
Why write I still all one, euer the same,
Wil be a totter’d weed of smal worth held:
Will play the tirants to the very same,
Will sourely leaue her till he haue preuailed.
Will, will fulfill the treasure of thy loue,
Wilt thou whose will is large and spatious,
Wishing me like to one more rich in hope,
With Aprills first borne flowers and all things rare,
With Sunne and Moone, with earth and seas rich gems:
With all triumphant splendor on my brow,
With beauties treasure ere it be selfe kil’d:
With eager compounds we our pallat vrge,
Within be fed, without be rich no more,
Within his bending sickles compasse come,
With insufficiency my heart to sway,
150: With insufficiency my heart to sway
Within the gentle closure of my brest,
Within the knowledge of mine own desart,
Within thine owne bud buriest thy content,
With lines and wrincles, when his youthfull morne
With meanes more blessed then my barren rime?
With mine owne weakenesse being best acquainted,
With my extern the outward honoring,
With my loues picture then my eye doth feast,
With others thou shouldst not abhor my state.
With ougly rack on his celestiall face,
Without accusing you of iniury.
With out all bayle shall carry me away,
Without all ornament, it selfe and true,
Without this follie, age, and could decay,
Without thy helpe, by me be borne alone.
With shifting change as is false womens fashion,
With thy sweet fingers when thou gently swayst,
With times iniurious hand chrusht and ore-worne,
With vertuous wish would beare your liuing flowers,
With what I most inioy contented least,
Wooing his purity with her fowle pride.
Worthy perusal stand against thy sight,
Wound me not with thine eye but with thy toung,
Wretched in this alone, that thou maist take,
Yet be most proud of that which I compile,
Yet doe thy worst ould Time dispight thy wrong,
Yet do not so, but since I am neere slaine,
Yet doth it steale sweet houres from loues delight,
Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art
Yet feare her O thou minnion of her pleasure,
Yet him for this, my loue no whit disdaineth,
Yet in good faith some say that thee behold,
Yet in these thoughts my selfe almost despising,
Yet mortall lookes adore his beauty still,
Yet nor the laies of birds, nor the sweet smell
Yet seem’d it Winter still, and you away,
Yet so they mourne becomming of their woe,
Yet then my iudgement knew no reason why,
Yet this aboundant issue seem’d to me,
Yet this shal I nere know but liue in doubt,
Yet this thy praise cannot be soe thy praise,
Yet what of thee thy Poet doth inuent,
Yet what the best is, take the worst to be.
Yet who knowes not conscience is borne of loue,
Yf my deare loue were but the childe of state,
124: Yf my deare loue were but the childe of state
You are my All the world, and I must striue,
You are so strongly in my purpose bred,
You had a Father, let your Son say so.
You liue in this, and dwell in louers eies.
Your loue and pittie doth th’impression fill,
112: Your loue and pittie doth th’impression fill
Your monument shall be my gentle verse,
Your name from hence immortall life shall haue,
Your owne glasse showes you, when you looke in it.
Your selfe again after your selfes decease,
Your selfe to pardon of selfe-doing crime.
Your shallowest helpe will hold me vp a floate,
You should liue twise in it, and in my rime.
You still shall liue (such vertue hath my Pen)
You to your beautious blessings adde a curse,
breath’d forth the sound that said I hate,
by
sdfasd fasdfsdfsdf
